
Skip to main content
Texts
Video
Audio
Software
Images

    Sign up for free
    Log in

Search metadata
Search text contents
Search TV news captions
Search radio transcripts
Search archived web sites
Advanced Search

    About Blog Projects Help Donate 

    Contact Jobs Volunteer People 

Full text of "The speeches of Henry Clay"
See other formats

00°102c,ifcIU 


Class  _ 

Book .  o°2 


,/ 


(Pi 


■ 


H 


. 


THE 


SPEECHES 


OF 


HENRY     CLAY. 


EDITED    BY 

CALVIN     COLTON,    LL.D.,  . 

PROFESSOR     OP     PUBLIC     ECONOMY,     TRINITY     COLLEGE, 


IN    TWO    VOLUMES. 
VOL.  I. 


NEW    YORK: 
PUBLISHED    BY    A.    S.    BARNES    &    CO., 

51    and    53    JOHN   STREET. 

1857. 


Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1857,  by 

A.     S.     BARNES    &    CO., 

In  the  Clerk's  Offico  of  the  District  Court  for  the  Southern  District  of  New  York. 


STEREOTYPED     BY 

THOMAS  B.   SMITH, 
S2  &  84  Beekman  Street,  N.  Y. 


PRINTED    BY 

GEORGE    W.    WOOD. 
51  John  St. 


PREFACE    TO    VOLUME    V- 


This  volume  is  the  fifth  of  the  series  comprising  the  Life, 
Correspondence,  and  Speeches  of  Henry  Clay,  the  first  three 
being  devoted  to  the  Life,  the  fourth  to  the  Correspondence, 
and  the  fifth  and  sixth  to  the  Speeches.  The  author  of  the  first 
three  volumes,  containing  the  Life  of  Mr.  Clay,  becomes  an 
editor  in  the  last  three,  which  contain  the  Correspondence  and 
Speeches.  The  fourth  volume,  which  contains  the  Private  Cor- 
respondence of  Mr.  Clay,  has  been  more  than  a  year  before  the 
public.  The  third  volume,  under  the  title  of  the  Last  Seven 
Years  of  the  Life  of  Henry  Clay,  was  published  subsequently 
to  that  containing  the  Correspondence ;  but,  as  will  be  seen,  the 
Correspondence  naturally  takes  the  place  of  the  fourth  volume 
of  the  series. 

The  author  of  the  Life,  who  is  the  editor  of  the  Correspond- 
ence and  Speeches,  thinks  it  proper,  in  this  edition  of  the 
Speeches,  to  say,  that  his  objects  have  been,  first,  to  give  Mr. 
Clay's  speeches  down  to  the  end  of  his  life.  They  had  never 
before  been  collected  later  than  1844.  Those  delivered  by  him 
in  the  Thirty-first  Congress  in  1849,  1850,  and  1851,  compre- 
hending about  one  fourth  of  all  that  have  been  preserved,  are 
among  the  most  interesting  and  most  important  of  his  life — 
more  especially  those  which  were  delivered  on  the  Compromises 
of  1850. 

The  next  object  of  the  editor  has  been,  to  give  a  historical 
introduction  to  each  of  the  speeches,  showing  the  position  which 
each  of  them  occupied  in  the  history  of  the  country.  These 
introductions  are  rarely  analytical ;  but  they  generally  relate  to 


IV  PREFACE.  / 

matters  outside  of  the  speeches,  though  connected  with  -them  in 
their  historical  relations  ;  and  they  furnish  opportunities;  as  will 
be  seen,  to  say  things  which  could  not  with  propriety  be' said  in 
the  Life  of  Mr.  Clay. 

The  author  of  the  Life  and  editor  of  the  Correspondence  and 
Speeches  of  Mr.  Clay,  has  endeavored  to  bring  together,  in  these 
six  volumes,  the  entire  history  of  his  subject ;  and  he  is  not 
aware  that  any  thing  of  importance  has  been  omitted.  The 
work  is  intended  to  represent  the  place  which  Mr.  Clay,  occupied 
in  the  social  and  political  history  of  the  country. 

C.  Colton. 

New  York,  January  15,  1857. 


CONTENTS   OF   VOLUME   V. 


PASS 

ON  DOMESTIC  MANUFACTURES T 

ON  THE  LINE  OF  THE  PEEDIDO, 12 

ON   RENEWING  THE   CHARTER  OF  THE   FIRST  BANK  OF  THE  UNITED 

STATES, 23 

ON  THE  INCREASE  OF  THE  ARMY, 8-1 

ON  THE  INCREASE  OF  THE  NAVY,        .* 42 

ON  THE  NEW  ARMY  BILL 53 

ON  MR.  CLAY'S  RETURN  FROM  GHENT, 71 

ON  THE  BANK  QUESTION, 74 

ON  THE  DIRECT  TAX  AND  STATE  OF  THE  NATION  AFTER  THE  WAR  OF 

1812 81 

ON  THE  BILL  FOE  ENFORCING  NEUTRALITY, 100 

ON  COMMERCIAL  RESTRICTIONS  WITH  THE  BRITISH  WEST  INDIES,  .        .       .103 

ON  INTERNAL  IMPROVEMENT, 108 

ON  THE  WAR  BETWEEN  SPAIN  AND  HER  COLONIES, Ill 

ON  INTERNAL  IMPROVEMENT 115 

♦  ON  EMANCIPATION  OF  THE  SOUTH  AMERICAN  STATES, 186 

•  ON  EMANCIPATION  OF  SOUTH  AMERICA 163 

ON  THE  SEMINOLE  WAR, 179 

ON  THE  SPANISH  TREATY, 205 

ON  PROTECTION  OF  HOME  INDUSTRY, 218 

•    ON  SENDING  A  MINISTER  TO  SOUTH  AMERICA, ;        .      238 

ON  THE  GREEK  REVOLUTION, 215 

ON  AMERICAN  INDUSTRY, 254 

REPLY  TO  JOHN  RANDOLPH, 295 

ADDRESS  TO  LA  FAYETTE 290 

MR.  CLAYS  ADDRESS  TO  HIS  CONSTITUENTS, 299 

ON  THE  PRESIDENTIAL  ELECTION  OF  1825, 820 

ON  AFRICAN  COLONIZATION, 828 

ON  BARGAIN  AND  CORRUPTION, 841 

DANGER  OF  THE  MILITARY  SPIRIT  IN  A  REPUBLIC '  .        .856 

ON  J.  Q.  ADAMS'S  ADMINISTRATION, 859 

ON  RETIRING  FROM  OFFICE, 865 

ON  THE  BEGINNING  OF  JACKSON'S  ADMINISTRATION, 86!) 

ON  THE  EFFECT  OF  THE  PROTECTIVE  SYSTEM  ON  THE  STAPLES  OF  THE 

SOUTH 888 

ON  NULLIFICATION, 893 

ON  REDUCTION  OF  IMPORT  DUTIES, 416 

ON  MR.  VAN  BUREN'S  NOMINATION  AS  MINISTER  TO  ENGLAND,       ...      429 
ON  THE  AMERICAN  SYSTEM, 43T 


VI  CONTENTS     OF     VOLUMEV. 

PAGB 

ON  THE  PUBLIC  LANDS, ^ 

ON  THE  NORTHEASTERN  BOUNDARY, 516 

ON  GENERAL  JACKSON'S  VETO  OF  THE  BANK  BILL, 523 

ON  THE  COMPROMISE  TARIFF, 536 

ON  THE  COMPROMISE  TARIFF  (CONTINUED), 551 

ON  THE  COMPROMISE  TARIFF  (CONCLUDED), 568 

ON  GENERAL  JACKSON'S  VETO  OF  THE  LAND  BILL, 570 

ON  THE  REMOVAL  OF  THE  DEPOSITS, 575 

ON  THE  RESULTS  OF  REMOVING  THE  DEPOSITS, .621 

ON  THE  STATE  OF  THE  COUNTRY, 624 

ON  OUR  RELATIONS  WITH  FRANCE, 632 

ON  OUR  RELATIONS  WITH  THE  CHEROKEE  INDIANS, 687 


a 


SPEECHES 


OP 


HENRY    CLAY 


ON  DOMESTIC  MANUFACTURES. 

IN  SENATE,  APRIL  6,  1810. 

[The  speeches  of  Mr.  Clay,  before  popular  assemblies,  for  some 
dozen  years  after  he  removed  to  Kentucky,  together  with  his 
forensic  arguments  and  the  part  he  took  in  the  debates  of  the 
Legislature  of  that  State  for  the  same  period,  which  laid  the 
foundation  of  his  reputation  as  a  public  man,  and  which  have 
been  represented  by  those  who  heard  them  as  among  the  finest 
specimens  of  his  oratorical  and  argumentative  powers,  are  not 
extant  in  any  form  worthy  of  being  published.  It  would,  in- 
deed, be  most  interesting,  if  we  were  able  to  display  the  fervid 
eloquence  of  Mr.  Clay's  youth,  in  company  with  the  speeches  of 
his  riper  years.  We  should  then  have  before  us  some  of  the 
original  elements  of  his  fame.  The  press  was  not  then  able,  as 
it  is  now,  to  send  its  reporters  into  the  courts,  to  the  hustings, 
and  into  legislative  assemblies,  to  give  to  the  public  the  speeches 
of  gifted  men.  Even  when  Mr.  Clay  first  appeared  in  the  Senate 
of  the  United  States,  in  1806,  and  made  several  important 
speeches  there,  especially  one  on  Internal  Improvements,  the 
press  of  the  day  failed  to  record  them  ;  and  it  was  not  till  his 
second  appearance  in  that  body,  when  the  session  of  Congress 
was  far  advanced,  that  we  have  an  imperfect  report  of  his  virgin 
speech  on  Domestic  Manufactures,  which  is  here  presented. 
This  theme,  as  is  well  known  to  the  student  of  history,  was  one 
of  the  great  studies  of  Mr.  Clay's  public  life,  which  was  never 
relaxed  to  his  dying  day.  A  careful  attention  to  this  short 
speech  will  show  that  it  contains  all  the  fundamental  elements 


8  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

of  the  same  argument  which  was  afterward,  during  Mr.  Clay's 
long  public  life,  so  much  enlarged,  so  greatly  diversified,  so  well 
illustrated,  and  so  effectively  enforced.  In  this  speech  we  find 
the  germ  of  all  he  ever  said  upon  the  subject.  Mr.  Clay's  first 
conceptions  of  a  great  theme  appertaining  to'state  affairs,  were 
next  to  infallible.  He  had  only  occasion  to  dilate — never  to 
change.  Even  on  the  bank  question,  as  we  shall  see,  he  only 
changed  with  a  change  of  circumstances.  There  was  no  incon- 
sistency. Like  a  skillful  statesman,  he  had  the  frankness  and 
the  boldness  to  adapt  himself  to  events  which  at  one  time  were 
against  the  renewal  of  the  charter,  but  which  afterward  rendered 
it  imperative.  Mr.  Clay  had  previously  and  eloquently  advo- 
cated domestic  manufactures,  while  a  member  of  the  Legislature 
of  Kentucky,  as  a  State  policy.  In  the  Senate  of  the  United 
States,  on  the  6th  of  April,  1810,  the  same  subject  being  in  de- 
bate before  that  body,  Mr.  Clay  spoke  as  follows  :] 

Mr.  President — 

The  local  interest  of  the  quarter  of  the  country,  which  I  have  the 
honor  to  represent,  will  apologize  for  the  trouble  I  may  give  you  on  this 
occasion.  My  colleague  has  proposed  an  amendment  to  the  bill  before 
you,  instructing  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  to  provide  supplies  of  cordage, 
sail-cloth,  hemp,  etc.,  and  to  give  a  preference  to  those  of  American 
growth  and  manufacture.  It  has  been  moved  by  the  gentleman  from 
Massachusetts  (Mr.  Loyd)  to  strike  out  this  part  of  the  amendment ;  and, 
in  the  course  of  the  discussion  which  has  arisen,  remarks  have  been  made 
on  the  general  policy  of  promoting  manufactures.  The  propriety  of  this 
policy  is,  perhaps,  not  very  intimately  connected  with  the  subject  before 
us;  but  it  is,  nevertheless,  within  the  legitimate  and  admissible  scope  of 
debate.     Under  this  impression  I  offer  my  sentiments. 

In  inculcating  the  advantages  of  domestic  manufactures,  it  never  en- 
tered the  head,  I  presume,  of  any  one,  to  change  the  habits  of  the  nation 
from  an  agricultural  to  a  manufacturing  community.  No  one,  I  am  per- 
suaded, ever  thought  of  converting  the  plowshare  and  the  sickle  into  the 
spindle  and  the  shuttle.  And  yet  this  is  the  delusive  and  erroneous  view 
too  often  taken  of  the  subject.  The  opponents  of  the  manufacturing 
system  transport  themselves  to  the  establishments  of  Manchester  and 
Birmingham,  and,  dwelling  on  the  indigence,  vice,  and  wretchedness  pre- 
vailing there,  by  pushing  it  to  an  extreme,  argue  that  its  introduction  into 
this  country  will  necessarily  be  attended  by  the  same  mischievous  and 
dreadful  consequences.  But  what  is  the  fact?  That  England  is  the 
manufacturer  of  a  great  part  of  the  world  ;  and  that,  even  there,  the  num- 
bers thus  employed  bear  an  inconsiderable  proportion  to  the  whole  mass 
of  population.     Were  we  to  become  the  manufacturers  of  other  nations, 


ON    DOMESTIC    MANUFACTURES.  9 

effects  of  the  same  kind  might  result.  But  if  we  limit  our  efforts,  by  our 
own  wants,  the  evils  "apprehended  would  be  found  to  be  chimerical.  The 
invention  and  improvement  of  machinery,  for  which  tbe  present  age  is  so 
remarkable,  dispensing  in  a  great  degree  with  manual  labor,  and  tbe  em- 
ployment of  those  persons  who,  if  we  were  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
agriculture  alone,  would  be  either  unproductive,  or  exposed  to  indolence 
and  immorality,  will  enable  us  to  supply  our  wants  without  withdrawing 
our  attention  from  agriculture,  that  first  and  greatest  source  of  national 
wealth  and  happiness.  A  judicious  American  farmer,  in  the  household 
way,  manufactures  whatever  is  requisite  for  his  family.  He  squanders  but 
little  in  the  gewgaws  of  Europe.  He  presents,  in  epitome,  what  the  nation 
ought  to  be  in  extenso.  Their  manufactories  should  bear  the  same  pro- 
portion, and  effect  the  same  object,  in  relation  to  the  whole  community, 
which  the  part  of  his  household  employed  in  domestic  manufacturing 
bears  to  the  whole  family.  It  is  certainly  desirable  that  the  exports  of 
the  country  should  continue  to  be  the  surplus  production  of  tillage,  and 
not  become  those  of  manufacturing  establishments.  But  it  is  import- 
ant to  diminish  our  imports ;  to  furnish  ourselves  with  clothing,  made 
by  our  own  industry  ;  and  to  cease  to  be  dependent,  for  the  very  coals  we 
wear,  upon  a  foreign  and,  perhaps,  inimical  country.  The  nation  that  im- 
ports its  clothing  from  abroad  is  but  little  less  dependent  than  if  it 
imported  its  bread. 

The  fallacious  course  of  reasoning  urged  against  domestic  manufactures, 
namely,  the  distress  and  servitude  produced  by  those  of  England,  would 
equally  indicate  the  propriety  of  abandoning  agriculture  itself.  Were 
you  to  cast  your  eyes  upon  the  miserable  peasantry  of  Poland,  and  revert 
to  the  days  of  feudal  vassalage,  you  might  thence  draw  numerous  argu- 
ments, of  the  kind  now  under  consideration,  against  the  pursuits  of  the 
husbandman  !  What  would  become  of  commerce,  the  favorite  theme  of 
some  gentlemen,  if  assailed  with  this  sort  of  weapon?  The  fraud,  perjury, 
cupidity,  and  corruption,  with  which  it  is  unhappily  too  often  attended, 
would  at  once  produce  its  overthrow.  In  short,  sir,  take  the  black  side 
of  the  picture,  and  every  human  occupation  will  be  found  pregnant  with 
fatal  objections. 

The  opposition  to  manufacturing  institutions  recalls  to  my  recollection 
the  case  of  a  gentleman  of  whom  I  have  heard.  He  had  been  in  the 
habit  of  supplying  his  table  from  a  neighboring  cook  and  confectioner's 
shop,  and  proposed  to  his  wife  a  reform  in  this  particular.  She  revolted  at 
the  idea.  The  sight  of  a  scullion  was  dreadful,  and  her  delicate  nerves 
could  not  bear  the  clattering  of  kitchen  furniture.  The  gentleman  per- 
sisted in  his  design ;  his  table  was  thenceforth  cheaper  and  better  supplied, 
and  his  neighbor,  the  confectioner,  lost  one  of  his  best  customers.  In  like 
manner  dame  Commerce  will  oppose  domestic  manufactures.  She  is  a 
flirting,  flippant,  noisy  jade,  and  if  we  are  governed  by  her  fantasies,  we 
shall  never  put  off  the  muslins  of  India  and  the  cloths  of  Europe.     But  I 


10  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY    CLAY. 

trust  that  the  yeomanry  of  the  country,  the  true  and  genuine  landlords  of  this 
tenement,  called  the  United  States,  disregarding  her  freaks,  will  persevere 
in  reform,  until  the  whole  national  family  is  furnished  by  itself  with  the 
clothing  necessary  for  its  own  use. 

It  is  a  subject  no  less  of  curiosity  than  of  interest,  to  trace  the  prejudices 
in  favor  of  foreign  fabrics.  In  our  colonial  condition,  we  were  in  a  com- 
plete state  of  dependence  on  the  parent  country,  as  it  respected  manu- 
factures, as  well  as  commerce.  For  many  years  after  the  war,  such  was 
the  partiality  for  her  productions,  in  this  country,  that  a  gentleman's  head 
could  not  withstand  the  influence  of  solar  heat  unless  covered  with  a  Lon- 
don hat ;  his  feet  could  not  bear  the  pebbles,  or  frost,  unless  protected  by 
London  shoes ;  and  the  comfort  or  ornament  of  his  person  was  only 
consulted  when  his  coat  was  cut  out  by  the  shears  of  a  tailor  "just  from 
London."  At  length,  however,  the  wonderful  discovery  has  been  made, 
that  it  is  not  absolutely'  beyond  the  reach  of  American  skill  and  ingenuity 
to  provide  these  articles,  combining  with  equal  elegance  greater  durability. 
And  I  entertain  no  doubt  that,  in  a  short  time,  the  no  less  important  fact 
will  be  developed,  that  the  domestic  manufactories  of  the  United  States, 
fostered  by  government,  and  aided  by  household  exertions,  are  fully  com- 
petent to  supply  us  with  at  least  every  necessary  article  of  clothing.  I 
therefore,  sir,  for  one  (to  use  the  fashionable  cant  of  the  day),  am  in  favor 
of  encouraging  them,  not  to  the  extent  to  which  they  are  carried  in  En- 
gland, but  to  such  an  extent  as  will  redeem  us  entirely  from  all  dependence 
on  foreign  countries.  There  is  a  pleasure — a  pride  (if  I  may  be  allowed 
the  expression,  and  I  pity  those  who  can  not  feel  the  sentiment),  in  being 
clad  in  the  productions  of  our  own  families.  Others  may  prefer  the  cloths 
of  Leeds  and  of  Loudon,  but  give  me  those  of  Humphreys ville. 

Aid  may  be  given  to  native  institutions  in  the  form  of  bounties  and  of 
protecting  duties.  But  against  bounties  it  is  urged  that  you  tax  the 
whole  for  the  benefit  of  a  part  only  of  the  community ;  and  in  opposition 
to  duties  it  is  alleged,  that  you  make  the  interest  of  one  part,  the  con- 
sumer, bend  to  the  interest  of  another  part,  the  manufacturer.  The  suf- 
ficiency of  the  answer  is  not  always  admitted,  that  the  sacrifice  is  merely 
temporary,  being  ultimately  compensated  by  the  greater  abundance  and 
superiority  of  the  article  produced  by  the  stimulus.  But,  of  all  practical 
forms  of  encouragement,  it  might  have  been  expected,  that  the  one  under 
consideration  would  escape  opposition,  if  every  thing  proposed  in  Congress 
were  not  doomed  to  experience  it.  What  is  it?  The  bill  contains  two 
provisions — one  prospective,  anticipating  the  appropriation  for  clothing  for 
the  army,  and  the  amendment  purposes  extending  it  to  naval  supplies,  for 
the  year  1811 — and  the  other,  directing  a  preference  to  be  given  to  home 
manufactures  and  productions,  whenever  it  can  be  done  without  material 
detriment  to  the  public  service.  The  object  of  the  first  is,  to  authorize 
contracts  to  be  made  beforehand,  with  manufacturers,  and  by  making  ad- 
vances to  them,  under  proper  security,  to  enable  them  to  supply  the  article* 


ON   DOMESTIC   MANUFACTURES.  11 

wanted  in  sufficient  quantity.  When  it  is  recollected  that  they  are  fre- 
queutly  men  of  limited  capitals,  it  will  he- acknowledged  that  this  kind  of 
assistance,  bestowed  with  prudence,  will  be  productive  of  the  best  results. 
It  is,  in  fact,  only  pursuing  a  principle  long  acted  upon,  of  advancing  to 
contractors  with  government,  on  account  of  the  magnitude  of  their  en- 
gagements. The  appropriation  contemplated  to  be  made  for  the  year 
1811,  may  be  restricted  to  such  a  sum  as,  whether  we  have  peace  or  war, 
we  must  necessarily  expend.  The  discretion  is  proposed  to  be  vested  in 
officers  of  high  confidence,  who  will  be  responsible  for  its  abuse,  and 
who  are  enjoined  to  see  that  the  public  service  receives  no  material  detri- 
ment. It  is  stated  that  hemp  is  now  very  high,  and  that  contracts,  made 
under  existing  circumstances,  will  be  injurious  to  government.  But  the 
amendment  creates  no  obligation  upon  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  to  go 
into  market  at  this  precise  moment.  In  fact,  by  enlarging  his  sphere  of 
action,  it  admits  of  his  taking  advantage  of  a  favorable  fluctuation,  and 
getting  a  supply  below  the  accustomed  price,  if  such  a  fall  should  occur 
prior  to  the  usual  annual  appropriation. 

I  consider  the  amendment,  under  consideration,  of  the  first  importance, 
in  point  of  principle.  It  is  evident,  that  whatever  doubt  may  be  enter- 
tained, as  to  the  general  policy  of  the  manufacturing  system,  none  can 
exist  as  to  the  propriety  of  our  being  able  to  furnish  ourselves  with 
articles  of  the  first  necessity  in  time  of  war.  Our  maritime  operations 
ought  not,  in  such  a  state,  to  depend  upon  the  casualties  of  foreign  supply. 
It  is  not  necessary  that  they  should.  With  very  little  encouragement 
from  government,  I  believe  we  shall  not  want  a  pound  of  Russia  hemp. 
The  increase  of  the  article  in  Kentucky  has  been  rapidly  great.  Ten 
years  ago  there  were  but  two  rope  manufactories  in  the  State.  Now  there 
are  about  twenty,  and  between  ten  and  fifteen  of  cotton  bagging ;  and  the 
erection  of  new  ones  keeps  pace  with  the  annual  augmentation  of  the  quan- 
tity of  hemp.  Indeed,  the  western  country,  alone,  is  not  only  adequate  to 
the  supply  of  whatever  of  this  article  is  requisite  for  our  own  consumption, 
but  is  capable  of  affording  a  surplus  for  foreign  markets.  The  amendment 
proposed  possesses  the  double  recommendation  of  encouraging,  at  the 
same  time,  both  the  manufacture  and  the  growth  of  hemp.  For  by  increas- 
ing the  demand  for  the  wrought  article,  you  also  increase  the  demand  for  the 
raw  material,  and  consequently  present  new  incentives  to  its  cultivator. 

The  three  great  subjects  that  claim  the  attention  of  the  national  legisla- 
ture, are  the  interests  of  agriculture,  commerce,  and  manufactures.  We 
have  had  before  us  a  proposition  to  afford  a  manly  protection  to  the 
rights  of  commerce,  and  how  has  it  been  treated  ?  Rejected  !  You  have 
been  solicited  to  promote  agriculture,  by  increasing  the  facilities  of  internal 
commutation,  through  the  means  of  canals  and  roads,  and  what  has  been 
done  ?  Postponed  !  We  are  now  called  upon  to  give  a  trifling  support  to 
our  domestic  manufactures,  and  shall  we  close  the  circle  of  congressional 
inefficiency,  by  adding  this  also  to  the  catalogue  I 


ON  THE   LINE   OF  THE   PERDIDO. 

IN  SENATE,  DECEMBER  25.  1810. 

[Mr.  Clay  appears  in  this  speech  in  defense  of  Mr.  Madison, 
President  of  the  United  States,  against  the  opposition,  who  had 
arraigned  the  President  for  having  taken  possession  of  a  terri- 
tory in  dispute  between  the  United  States  and  Spain,  extending 
from  the  Mississippi  to  the  river  and  bay  of  the  Perdido,  which 
is  now  the  western  boundary  of  Florida,  and  consequently  the 
eastern  line  of  Alabama.  Florida  was  originally  a  colony  of 
Spain,  and  was  settled  by  her.  In  1763  it  was  ceded  to  Great 
Britain,  and  afterward  receded  to  Spain  in  1783.  Louisiana  had 
also  repeatedly  changed  hands,  first  from  France  to  Spain,  after- 
ward from  Spain  to  France,  and  it  was  sold  to  the  United  States 
in  1803,  under  the  administration  of  Mr.  Jefferson.  Under  all 
these  changes,  the  Perdido  had  always  been  the  recognized 
boundary  between  Florida  and  Louisiana,  till  Spain  came  in 
possession  of  both,  when,  for  her  own  convenience  of  jurispru- 
dence, she  incorporated  with  Florida  the  territory  between  the 
Perdido  and  the  Mississippi.  Hence  the  dispute  between  the 
United  States  and  Spain,  after  the  purchas'e  of  Louisiana  by  Mr. 
Jefferson.  Mr,  Madison,  in  concurrence  with  the  advice  of  his 
Cabinet,  thought  proper  to  put  an  end  to  this  controversy  by 
taking  possession  of  the  disputed  territory,  and  the  following 
speech  was  delivered  by  Mr.  Clay  in  vindication  of  this  course. 
The  Louisiana  which  France  ceded  to  Spain  was  doubtless  the 
same  Louisiana  which  Spain  receded  to  France,  and  which  we 
bought  of  France  ;  and  its  eastern  boundary  was  the  Perdido. 
The  patent  granted  by  Louis  XIV.  to  Crozat,  referred  to  in  this 
speech  of  Mr.  Clay,  represents  Louisiana  as  bounded  west  "  by 
New  Mexico,"  and  east  "  by  the  lands  of  the  English  of  Caro- 
lina." Although  this  last  line  is  not  very  definite,  in  view  of  the 
present  civil  divisions  of  that  country,  it  is  evident  enough  that 
it  could  not  extend  to  the  Mississippi,  nor  further  west  than  the 
Perdido  ;  and  this  patent  of  Louis  XIV.  was  the  best  authority 


ON   THE   LINE   OF   THE   PEEDIDO.  13 

extant  for  deciding  this  question.     The  ground  of  Mr.  Clay's 
argument,  therefore,  may  he  regarded  as  impregnable. 

It  is  remarkable  that  Mr.  Clay,  while  delivering  this  speech, 
looked  forward  to  the  time  when  Florida  would  become  a  part 
of  the  United  States,  and  that  he  thought  of  the  Canadas  also 
as  having  a  like  probable  destiny.] 

Mr.  President — 

It  would  have  gratified  me  if  some  other  gentleman  had  undertaken 
to  reply  to  the  ingenious  argument,  which  you  have  just  heard.  (From 
Mr.  Horsey,  of  Delaware.)  But  not  perceiving  any  one  disposed  to  do  so, 
a  sense  of  duty  obliges  me,  though  very  unwell,  to  claim  your  indulgence, 
while  I  offer  my  sentiments  on  this  subject,  so  interesting  to  the  Union  at 
large,  but  especially  to  the  western  portion  of  it.  Allow  me,  sir,  to  express 
my  admiration  at  the  more  than  Aristidean  justice,  which  in  a  question  of 
territorial  title  between  the  United  States  and  a  foreign  nation,  induces  cer- 
tain gentlemen  to  espouse  the  pretensions  of  the  foreign  nation.  Doubtless, 
in  any  future  negotiations,  she  will  have  too  much  magnanimity  to  avail 
herself  of  these  spontaneous  concessions  in  her  favor,  made  on  the  floor  of 
the  Senate  of  the  United  States. 

It  was  to  have  been  expected,  that,  in  a  question  like  the  present,  gentle- 
men, even  on  the  same  side,  would  have  different  views,  and  although 
arriving  at  a  common  conclusion,  would  do  so  by  various  arguments. 
And  hence  the  honorable  gentleman  from  Vermont  entertains  doubt  with 
regard  to  our  title  against  Spain,  while  he  feels  entirely  satisfied  of  it 
against  France.  Believing,  as  I  do,  that  our  title  against  both  powers  is 
indisputable,  under  the  treaty  of  St.  Ildefonso,  between  Spain  and  France, 
and  the  treaty  between  the  French  republic  and  the  United  States,  I  shall 
not  inquire  into  the  treachery,  by  which  the  King  of  Spain  is  alleged  to 
have  lost  his  crown ;  nor  shall  I  stop  to  discuss  the  question  involved  in 
the  overthrow  of  the  Spanish  monarchy,  and  how  far  the  power  of  Spain 
ought  to  be  considered  as  merged  in  that  of  France.  I  shall  leave  the 
honorable  gentleman  from  Delaware  to  mourn  over  the  fortunes  of  the 
fallen  Charles.  I  have  no  commiseration  for  princes.  My  sympathies  are 
reserved  for  the  great  mass  of  mankind,  and  I  own  that  the  people  of  Spain 
have  them  most  sincerely. 

I  will  adopt  the  course  suggested  by  the  nature  of  the  subject,  and 
pursued  by  other  gentlemen,  of  examining  into  our  title  to  the  country 
lying  between  the  Mississippi  and  the  Rio  Perdido  (which,  to  avoid  cir- 
cumlocution, I  will  call  West  Florida,  although  it  is  not  the  whole  of  it) 
and  the  propriety  of  the  recent  measures  taken  for  the  occupation  of  that 
Territory.  Our  title,  then,  depends,  first,  upon  the  limits  of  the  province 
or  colony  of  Louisiana,  and,  secondly,  upon  a  just  exposition  of  the  treaties 
before  mentioned. 


14  SPEECHES  OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

On  this  occasion  it  is  only  necessary  to  fix  the  eastern  boundary.  In 
order  to  ascertain  this,  it  Avill  be  proper  to  take  a  cursory  view  of  the 
settlement  of  the  country,  because  the  basis  of  European  title  to  colonies  in 
America,  is  prior  discovery,  or  prior  occupancy.  In  1682,  La  Salle  mi- 
grated from  Canada,  then  owned  by  France,  descended  the  Mississippi,  and 
named  the  country  which  it  waters,  Louisiana.  About  1698,  D'Iberville 
discovered,  by  sea,  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  established  a  colony  at  the 
Isle  of  Dauphine,  or  Massacre,  which  lies  at  tlie  mouth  of  the  bay  of  Mo- 
bile, and  one  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Mobile,  and  was  appointed,  by 
France,  governor  of  the  country.  In  the  year  1717,  the  famous  West 
India  Company  sent  inhabitants  to  the  Isle  of  Dauphine,  and  found  some 
of  those  who  had  settled  there  under  the  auspices  of  D'Iberville.  About 
the  same  period,  Baloxi,  near  the  Pascagoula,  was  settled.  In  1719,  the 
city  of  New  Orleans  was  laid  oft',  and  the  seat  of  government  of  Louisiana 
was  established  there;  and  in  1736  the  French  erected  a  fort  ou  Tombig- 
bee.  These  facts  prove  that  France  had  the  actual  possession  of  the 
country  as  far  east  as  the  Mobile,  at  least.  But  the  great  instrument  which 
ascertains,  beyond  all  doubt,  that  the  country  in  question  is  comprehended 
within  the  limits  of  Louisiana,  is  one  of  the  most  authentic  and  solemn 
character  which  the  archives  of  a  nation  can  furnish.  I  mean  the  patent 
granted  in  1712,  by  Louis  XIV.,  to  Crozat.  [Mr.  C.  read  such  parts  of 
the  patent  as  were  applicable  to  his  purpose.]  According  to  this  document, 
in  describing  the  province  or  colony  of  Louisiana,  it  is  declared  to  be 
bounded  by  Carolina  on  the  east,  and  Old  and  New  Mexico  on  the  west. 
Under  this  high  record  evidence,  it  might  be  insisted  that  we  have  a  fair 
claim  to  East  as  well  as  West  Florida,  against  Frauce,  at  least,  unless  she 
has,  by  some  convention,  or  other  obligatory  act,  restricted  the  eastern 
limit  of  the  province.  It  has,  indeed,  been  asserted,  that,  by  a  treaty  be- 
tween France  and  Spain,  concluded  in  the  year  1719,  the  Perdido  was 
expressly  stipulated  to  be  the  boundary  between  their  respective  provinces 
of  Florida  on  the  east,  and  Louisiana  on  the  west ;  but  as  I  have  been  un- 
able to  find  any  such  treaty,  I  am  induced  to   doubt  its  existence. 

About  the  same  period,  to  wit,  toward  the  close  of  the  seventeenth 
century,  when  France  settled  the  Isle  of  Dauphine,  and  the  Mobile,  Spain 
erected  a  fort  at  Pensacola.  But  Spain  never  pushed  her  actual  settle- 
ments, or  conquests,  further  west  than  the  bay  of  Pensacola,  while  those 
of  the  French  were  bounded  on  the  east  by  the  Mobile.  Between  these 
two  points,  a  space  of  about  thirteen  or  fourteen  leagues,  neither  nation 
had  the  exclusive  possession.  The  Rio  Perdido,  forming  the  bay  of  the 
same  name,  discharges  itself  into  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  between  the  Mobile 
and  Pensacola,  and,  being  a  natural  and  the  most  notorious  object  between 
them,  presented  itself  as  a  suitable  boundary  between  the  possessions  of 
the  two  nations.  It  accordingly  appears  very  early  to  have  been  adopt- 
ed as  the  boundary,  by  tacit  if  not  expressed  consent..  The  ancient  charts 
and  historians,  therefore  of  the  country,  so  represent  it.     Dupratz,  one  of 


ON   THE   LINE   OF   THE   PERDIDO.  15 

the  most  accurate  historians  of  the  time,  in  point  of  fact  and  detail,  whose 
work  was  published  as  early  as  1758,  describes  the  coast  as  being  bounded 
on  the  east  by  the  Rio  Perdido.  In  truth,  sir,  no  European  nation  what- 
ever, except  France,  ever  occupied  any  portion  of  West  Florida,  prior  to 
her  cession  of  it  to  England,  iu  1762.  The  gentlemen  on  the  other  side 
do  not,  indeed,  strongly  controvert,  if  they  do  not  expressly  admit,  that- 
Louisiana,  as  held  by  the  French  anterior  to  the  cession  of  it  in  1762,  ex- 
tended to  the  Perdido.  The  only  observation  made  by  the  gentleman 
from  Delaware  to  the  contrary,  to  wit,  that  the  island  of  New  Orleans,  be- 
ing particularly  mentioned,  could  not,  for  that  reason,  constitute  a  part  of 
Louisiana,  is  susceptible  of  a  very  satisfactory  answer.  That  island  was 
excepted  out  of  the  grant  to  England,  and  was  the  only  part  of  the  province 
east  of  the  river  that  was  so  excepted.  It  formed  in  itself  one  of  the 
most  prominent  and  important  objects  of  the  cession  to  Spain  originally, 
and  was  transferred  to  her  with  the  portion  of  the  province  west  of  the 
Mississippi.  It  might  with  equal  propriety  be  urged  that  St.  Augustine  is 
not  in  East  Florida,  because  St.  Augustine  is  expressly  mentioned  by  Spain 
in  her  cession  of  that  province  to  England.  From  this  view  of  the 
subject,  I  think  it  results  that  the  province  of  Louisiana  comprised  West 
Florida,  previous  to  the  year  1762. 

What  was  done  with  it  at  this  epoch  ?  By  a  secret  convention  of  the 
third  of  November,  of  that  year,  France  ceded  the  country  lying  west  of 
the  Mississippi,  and  the  island  of  New  Orleans,  to  Spain  ;  and  by  a  cotem- 
poraneous  act,  the  articles  preliminary  to  the  definitive  treaty  of  1763,  she 
transferred  West  Florida  to  England.  Thus,  at  the  same  instant  of  time, 
she  alienated  the  whole  province.  Posterior  to  this  grant,  Great  Britain, 
having  also  acquired  from  Spain  her  possessions  east  of  the  Mississippi, 
erected  the  country  into  two  provinces,  East  and  West  Florida.  In  this 
state  of  things  it  continued  until  the  peace  of  1783,  when  Great  Britain, 
in  consequence  of  the  events  of  the  war,  surrendered  the  country  to  Spain, 
who,  for  the  first  time,  came  into  actual  possession  of  West  Florida. 
Well,  sir,  how  does  she  dispose  of  it  ?  She  reannexes  it  to  the  residue  of 
Louisiana,  extends  the  jurisdiction  of  that  government  to  it,  and  sub- 
jects the  governors,  or  commandants,  of  the  districts  of  Baton  Rouge, 
Feliciana,  Mobile,  and  Pensacola,  to  the  authority  of  the  governor  of  Lou- 
isiana, residing  at  New  Orleans;  while  the  governor  of  East  Florida  is 
placed  wholly  without  his  control,  and  is  made  amenable  directly  to  the 
governor  of  the  Havannah.  Indeed,  sir,  I  have  been  credibly  informed, 
that  all  the  concessions,  or  grants  of  land,  made  iu  West  Florida,  under 
the  authority  of  Spain,  run  in  the  name  of  the  government  of  Louisiana. 
You  can  not  have  forgotten  that,  about  the  period  when  we  took  posses- 
sion of  New  Orleans,  under  the  treaty  of  cession  from  France,  the  whole 
country  resounded  with  the  nefarious  speculations  which  were  alleged  to 
be  making  in  that  city  with  the  connivance,  if  not  actual  participation,  of 
the  Spanish  authorities,  by  the  procurement  of  surreptitious  grants  of 


16  SPEECHES  OF   HENRY    CLAY. 

land,  particularly  in  the  district  of  Feliciana.  West  Florida,  then,  not 
only  as  France  had  held  it,  but  as  it  was  in  the  hands  of  Spain,  made  a 
part  of  the  province  of  Louisiana,  as  much  so  as  the  jurisdiction  or  dis- 
trict of  Baton  Rouge  constituted  a  part  of  West  Florida. 

What,  then,  is  the  true  construction  of  the  treaties  of  St.  Ildefonso,  and 
of  April,  1803,  from  whence  our  title  is  derived?  If  an  ambiguity  exist 
in  a  grant,  the  interpretation  most  favorable  to  the  grantee  is  preferred. 
It  was  the  duty  of  the  grantor  to  have  expressed  himself  in  plain  and  in- 
telligible terms.  This  is  the  doctiine,  not  of  Coke  only  (whose  dicta  I 
admit  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  question),  but.  of  the  code  of  universal 
law.  The  doctrine  is  entitled  to  augmented  force,  when  a  clause  only  of 
the  instrument  is  exhibited,  in  which  clause  the  ambiguity  lurks,  and  the 
residue  of  the  instrument  is  kept  back  by  the  grantor.  The  entire  conven- 
tion of  1762,  by  which  France  transferred  Louisiana  to  Spain,  is  concealed, 
and  the  whole  of  the  treaty  of  St.  Ildefonso,  except  a  sol'tary  cLuse.  We 
are  thus  deprived  of  the  aid  which  a  full  view  of  both  of  those  instru- 
ments would  afford.  But  we  have  no  occasion  to  resort  to  any  rules  of 
construction,  however  reasonable  in  themselves,  to  establish  our  title.  A 
competent  knowledge  of  the  facts  connected  with  the  case,  and  a  candid 
appeal  to  the  treaties,  are  alone  sufficient  to  manifest  our  right.  The  ne- 
gotiators of  the  treaty  of  1803,  having  signed,  with  the  same  ceremony, 
two  copies,  one  in  English  and  the  other  in  the  French  language,  it  has 
been  contended,  that  in  the  English  version  the  term  '  cede'  hns  been  er- 
roneously used  instead  of  'retrocede,'  which  is  the  expression  in  the 
French  copy.  And  it  is  argued,  that  we  are  bound  by  the  phraseology  of 
the  French  copy,  because  it  is  declared  that  the  treaty  was  agreed  to  in 
that  language.  It  would  not  be  very  unfair  to  inquire,  if  this  is  not  like 
the  common  case  in  private  life,  where  individuals  enter  into  a  contract  of 
which  each  party  retains  a  copy,  duly  executed.  In  such  case,  neither  has 
the  preference.  We  might  as  well  say  to  France,  we  will  cling  by  the 
English  copy,  as  she  could  insist  upon  an  adherence  to  the  French  copy; 
and  if  she  urged  ignorance  on  the  part  of  Mr.  M  irbois,  her  negotiator,  of 
our  language,  we  might  with  equal  propriety  plead  ignorance,  on  the  part 
of  our  negotiators,  of  her  language.  As  this,  however,  is  a  disputable 
point,  I  do  not  avail  myself  of  it ;  gentlemen  shall  have  the  full  benefit 
of  the  expressions  in  the  French  copy.  According  to  this,  then,  in  recit- 
ing the  treaty  of  St.  Ildefonso,  it  is  declared  by  Spain,  in  1800,  that  she 
retrocedes  to  France,  the  colony  or  province  of  Louisiana,  with  the  same 
extent  which  it  then  had  in  the  hands  of  Spain,  and  which  it  had  when 
France  possessed  it,  and  such  as  it  should  be  after  the  treaties  sub-equently 
entered  into  between  Spain  and  other  states.  This  latter  member  of  the 
description  has  been  sufficietly  explained  by  my  colleague. 

It  is  said,  that  since  France,  in  1762,  ceded  to  Spain  only  Loirsiana  west 
of  the  Mississippi,  and  the  Island  of  New  Orleans,  the  retrocession  com- 
prehended no  more — that  the  retrocession  ex  vi  termini  was  commensurate 


ON   THE   LINK   OF   THE    PERDIDO.  17 

with  and  limited  by  the  direct  cession  from  France  to  Spain.  If  this  were 
true,  then  the  description,  such  as  Spaia  held  it,  that  is,  in  1800,  compris- 
ing West  Florida,  and  such  as  France  possessed  it,  that  is,  in  1762,  prior 
to  the  several  cessions,  comprising  also  West  Florida,  would  be  totally  in- 
operative. But  the  definition  of  the  term  retrocession  contended  for  by 
the  other  side  is  denied.  It  does  not  exclude  the  instrumentality  of  a  third 
party.  It  means  restoration,  or  reconveyance  of  a  thing  originally  ceded, 
and  so  the  gentleman  from  Delaware  acknowledged.  I  admit  that  the 
thing  restored  must  have  come  to  the  restoring  party  from  the  party  to 
whom  it  is  retroceded  ;  whether  directly  or  indirectly  is  wholly  immaterial. 
In  its  passage  it  may  have  come  through  a  dozen  hands.  The  retroceding 
party  must  claim  under  and  in  virtue  of  the  right  originally  possessed  by 
the  party  to  whom  the  retrocession  takes  place.  Allow  me  to  put  a  case. 
You  own  an  estate  called  Louisiana.  You  convey  one  moiety  of  it  to  the 
gentleman  from  Delaware,  and  the  other  to  me ;  he  conveys  his  moiety  to 
me,  and  I  thus  become  entitled  to  the  whole.  By  a  suitable  instrument  I 
reconvey,  or  retrocede  the  estate  called  Louisiana  to  you  as  I  now  hold  it, 
and  as  you  held  it ;  what  passes  to  you  ?  The  whole  estate  or  my  moiety 
only  ?  Let  me  indulge  another  supposition,  to  wit :  that  the  gentleman  from 
Delaware,  after  he  received  from  you  his  moiety,  bestowed  a  new  denomin- 
tion  upon  it  and  called  it  West  Florida  ; — would  that  circumstance  vary 
the  operation  of  my  act  of  retrocession  to  you?  The  case  supposed,  is,  in 
truth,  the  real  one  between  the  United  States  and  Spain.  France,  in  1762, 
transfers  Louisiana,  west  of  the  Mississippi,  to  Spain,  and  at  the  same  time 
conveys  the  eastern  portion  of  it,  exclusive  of  New  Orleans,  to  Great 
Britain.  Twerty-one  years  after,  that  is,  in  1783,  Great  Britain  cedes  her 
part  to  Spain,  who  thus  becomes  possessed  of  the  entire  province ;  one 
portion  by  direct  cession  from  France,  and  the  residue  by  indirect  cession. 
Spain,  then,  held  the  whole  of  Louisiana  under  France,  and  in  virtue  of 
the  title  of  France.  The  whole  moved  or  passed  from  France  to  her. 
When,  therefore,  in  this  state  of  things,  she  says,  in  the  treaty  of  St.  Ude- 
fonso,  that  she  retrocedes  the  province  to  France,  can  a  doubt  exist  that 
she  parts  with,  and  gives  back  to  France  the  entire  colony  ?  To  preclude 
the  possibility  of  such  a  doubt,  she  adds,  that  she  restores  it,  not  in  a  mu- 
tilated condition,  but  in  that  precise  condition  in  which  France  and  she 
herself  had  possessed  it. 

Having  thus  shown,  as  I  conceive,  a  clear  right  in  the  United  States  to 
West  Florida,  I  proceed  to  inquire,  if  the  proclamation  of  the  president 
directing  the  occupation  of  propeaty,  which  is  thus  fairly  acquired  by 
solemn  treaty,  be  an  unauthorized  measure  of  war  and  of  legislation,  as  has 
been  contended  ? 

The  act  of  October,  1803,  contains  two  sections,  by  one  of  which  the 
president  is  authorized  to  occupy  the  territories  ceded  to  us  by  France  in 
the  April  preceding.  The  other  empowers  the  president  to  establish  a 
provisional  government  there.     The  first  section  is  unlimited  in  its  dura- 

2 


18  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

. 

tion  ;  the  other  is  restricted  to  the  expiration  of  the  then  session  of  Con- 
gress. The  act,  therefore,  of  March,  1804,  declaring  that  the  previous  act 
of  October  should  continue  in  force  until  the  first  of  October,  1804,  is  ap- 
plicable to  the  second  and  not  to  the  first  section,  and  was  intended  to 
continue  the  provisional  government  of  the  president.  By  the  act  of 
24th  February,  1804,  for  laying  duties  on  goods  imported  into  the  ceded 
territories,  the  president  is  empowered,  whenever  he  deems  it  expedient,  to 
erect  the  bay  and  river  Mobile,  etc.,  into  a  separate  district,  and  to  estab- 
lish therein  a  port  of  entry  and  delivery.  By  this  same  act  the  Orleans 
territory  is  laid  off,  and  its  boundaries  are  so  defined,  as  to  comprehend 
West  Florida.  By  other  acts  the  president  is  authorized  to  remove  by 
force,  under  certain  circumstances,  persons  settling  on,  or  taking  possession 
of  lands  ceded  to  the  United  States. 

These  laws  furnish  a  legislative  construction  of  the  treaty,  corresponding 
with  that  given  by  the  executive,  and  they  indisputably  vest  in  this  branch 
of  the  general  government  the  power  to  take  possession  of  the  country, 
whenever  it  might  be  proper  in  his  discretion.  The  president  has  not, 
therefore,  violated  the  constitution  and  usurped  the  war-making  power, 
but  he  would  have  violated  that  provision  which  requires  him  to  see  that 
the  laws  are  faithfully  executed,  if  he  had  longer  forborne  to  act.  It  is 
urged,  that  he  has  assumed  powers  belonging  to  Congress,  in  undertaking 
to  annex  the  portion  of  West  Florida,  between  the  Mississippi  and  the 
Perdido,  to  the  Orleans  territory.  But  Congress,  as  has  been  shown,  has 
already  made  this  annexation,  the  limits  of  the  Orleans  territory,  as  pre- 
scribed by  Congress,  comprehending  the  country  in  question.  The  pres- 
ident, by  his  proclamation,  has  not  made  law,  but  has  merely  declared  to 
the  people  of  West  Florida,  what  the  law  is.  This  is  the  office  of  a  proc- 
lamation, and  it  was  highly  proper  that  the  people  of  that  territory  should 
be  thus  notified.  By  the  act  of  occupying  the  country,  the  government 
de  facto,  whether  of  Spain,  or  the  revolutionists,  ceased  to  exist ;  and  the 
laws  of  the  Orleans  territory,  applicable  to  the  country,  by  the  operation 
and  force  of  law,  attached  to  it.  But  this  was  a  state  of  things  which  the 
people  might  not  know,  ami  which  every  dictate  of  justice  and  humanity, 
therefore,  required  should  be  proclaimed.  T  consider  the  bill  before  us 
merely  in  the  light  of  a  declaratory  law. 

Never  could  a  more  propitious  moment  present  itself  for  the  exercise 
of  the  discretionary  power  placed  in  the  president ;  and.  had  he  failed  to 
embrace  it,  he  would  have  been  criminally  inattentive  to  the  dearest  in- 
terests of  this  country.  It  can  not  be  too  often  repeated,  that  if  Cuba  on 
the  one  hand,  and  Florida  on  the  other,  are  in  the  possession  of  a  for- 
eign maritime  power,  the  immense  extent  of  country  belonging  to  the 
United  States,  and  watered  by  streams  discharging  themselves  into  the 
Gulf  of  Mexico — that  is,  one  third,  nay,  more  than  two  thirds  of  the 
United  States,  comprehending  Louisiana,  are  placed  at  the  mercy  of  that 
power.     The  possession   of  Florida  is  a  guaranty  absolutely  necessary  to 


ON   THE   LINE    OF   THE   PEKDIDO.  19 

the  enjoyment  of  the  navigation  of  those  streams.     The  gentleman  from 
Delaware  anticipates  the  most  direful  consequences  from  the  occupation 
of  the  country.     He  supposes  a  sally  from  a  Spanish  garrison  upon  the 
American  forces,  and  asks  what  is  to  he  done  ?     We  attempt  a  peaceful 
possession  of  the  country  to  which  we  are  fairly  entitled.     If  the  wrongful 
occupants,  under  the  authority  of  Spain,   assail  our  troops,  I  trust  they 
will  retrieve  the  lost  honor  of  the  nation,  in  the  case  of  the  Chesapeake. 
Suppose  an  attack  upon  any  portion  of  the   American  army,  within  the 
acknowledged  limits  of  the  United  States,  by  a  Spanish  force  ?     In  such 
event,  there  would  exist  hut  a  single  honorable  and  manly  course.     The 
gentleman  conceives  it  ungenerous  that  we  should  at  this  moment,  when 
Spain  is  encompassed  and  pressed,  on  all  sides,  by  the  immense  power 
of  her  enemy,  occupy  West  Florida.     Shall  we  sit  by,  passive  spectators, 
and  witness  the  interesting  transactions  of  that  country — transactions  which 
tend,  in  the  most  imminent  degree,  to  jeopardize  our  rights,  without  at- 
tempting to  interfere  ?     Are  you  prepared  to  see  a  foreign  power  seize 
what  belongs  to  us  ?     I  have  heard,  in  the  most  credible  manner,  that, 
about  the  period  when  the  president  took  his  measures  in  relation  to  that 
country,  agents  of  a  foreign  power  were  intriguing  with  the  people  there, 
to  induce  them  to  come  under  his  dominion ;  but  whether  this  be  the  fact 
or  not,  it  can  not  be  doubted,  that  if  you  neglect  the  present  auspicious 
moment,  if  you  reject  the  proffered   boon,  some  other  nation,  profiting  by 
your  errors,  will  seize  the  occasion  to  get  a  fatal  footing  in  your  southern 
frontier.     I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying,  that   if  a  parent  country  will  not 
or  can  not  maintain  its  authority,  in  a  colony  adjacent  to  us,  and  there 
exists  in  it  a  state   of  misrule  and  disorder,  menacing  our  peace ;  and  if, 
moreover,  such  colony,  by  passing  into  the  hands  of  any  other  power, 
would  become  dangerous  to  the  integrity  of  the  Union,  and  manifestly 
tend  to  the  subversion  of  our  laws,  we  have  a  right,  upon  the  eternal 
principles  of  self-preservation,  to  lay  hold  upon  it.     This  principle  alone, 
independent  of  any  title,  would  warrant  our  occupation  of  West  Florida. 
But  it  is  not  necessary  to  resort  to  it— our  title  being,  in  my  judgment, 
incontestably  good.     We  are  told  of  the  vengeance  of  resuscitated  Spain. 
If  Spain,  under  any  modification  of  her  government,  choose  to  make  war 
upon  us,  for  the  act  under  consideration,  the  nation,  I  have  no  doubt, 
will  be  willing  to  embark  in  such  a  contest.     But  the  gentleman  reminds 
us  that  Great  Britain,  the  ally  of  Spain,  may  be  obliged,  by  her  connec- 
tion with  that  country,  to  take  part  with  her  against  us,  and  to  consider 
this  measure  of  the  president  as  justifying  an  appeal  to  arms.     Sir,  is  the 
time  never  to  arrive  when  we  may  manage  our  own  affairs  without  the 
fear  of  insulting  his  Britannic  majesty  ?     Is  the  rod  of  British  power  to  be 
forever  suspended  over  our  heads  ?     Does  Congress  put  on  an  embargo  to 
shelter  our  rightful  commerce  against  the  piratical  depredations  committed 
upon  it  on  the  ocean  ?     We  are  immediately  warned  of  the  indignation 
of  offended  England.     Is  a  law  of  non-intercourse  proposed  ?     The  whole 


20  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

navy  of  the  haughty  mistress  of  the  seas  is  made  to  thunder  in  our  ears. 
Does  the  president  refuse  to  continue  a  correspondence  with  a  minister 
who  violates  the  decorum  belonging  to  his  diplomatic  character,  by  giving 
and  deliberately  repeating  an  affront  to  the  whole  nation  ?  We  are  in- 
stantly menaced  with  the  chastisement  which  English  pride  will  not  fail  to 
inflict.  Whether  we  assert  our  rights  by  sea,  or  attempt  their  mainte- 
nance by  land — whithersoever  we  turn  ourselves,  this  phantom  incessantly 
pursues  us.  Already  has  it  had  too  much  influence  on  the  councils  of 
the  nation.  It  contributed  to  the  repeal  of  the  embargo — that  dishonor- 
able repeal,  which  has  so  much  tarnished  the  character  of  our  govern- 
ment. Mr.  President,  I  have  before  said  on  this  floor,  and  now  take 
occasion  to  remark,  that  I  most  sincerely  desire  peace  and  amity  with  En- 
gland; that  I  even  prefer  an  adjustment  of  all  differences  with  her,  before 
one  with  any  other  nation.  But  if  she  persists  in  a  denial  of  justice  to 
us,  or  if  she  avails  herself  of  the  occupation  of  West  Florida,  to  commence 
war  upon  us,  I  trust  and  hope  that  all  hearts  will  unite  in  a  bold  and 
vigorous  vindication  of  our  rights.  I  do  not  believe,  however,  in  the  pre- 
diction that  war  will  be  the  effect  of  the  measure  in  question. 

It  is  asked,  why,  some  years  ago,  when  the  interruption  of  the  right 
of  deposit  took  place  at  New  Orleans,  the  government  did  not  declare 
war  against  Spain  ?  and  how  it  has  happened  that  there  has  been  this 
long  acquiescence  in  the  Spanish  possession  of  West  Florida  ?  The  an- 
swer is  obvious.  It  consists  in  the  genius  of  the  nation,  which  is  prone 
to  peace ;  in  that  desire  to  arrange,  by  friendly  negotiation,  our  disputes 
with  all  nations,  which  has  constantly  influenced  the  present  and  preced- 
ing administrations ;  and  in  the  jealousy  of  armies,  with  which  we  have 
been  inspired  by  the  melancholy  experience  of  free  estates.  But  a  new 
state  of  things  has  arisen :  negotiation  has  become  hopeless.  The  power 
with  whom  it  was  to  be  conducted,  if  not  annihilated,  is  in  a  situation 
that  precludes  it ;  and  the  subject-matter  of  it  is  in  danger  of  being 
snatched  forever  from  our  power.  Longer  delay  would  be  construed  into 
a  dereliction  of  our  right,  and  would  amount  to  treachery  to  ourselves. 
May  I  ask,  in  my  turn,  why  certain  gentlemen,  now  so  fearful  of  war, 
were  so  urgent  for  it  with  Spain,  when  she  withheld  the  right  of  deposit  ? 
and  still  later,  when  in  1805  or  6,  this  very  subject  of  the  actual  limits  of 
Louisiana,  was  before  Congress  ?  I  will  not  say,  because  I  do  not  know 
that  I  am  authorized  to  say,  that  the  motive  is  to  be  found  in  the 
change  of  relation  between  Spain  and  other  European  powers,  since 
those  periods. 

Does  the  honorable  gentleman  from  Delaware  really  believe,  that  he 
finds  in  St.  Domingo  a  case  parallel  with  that  of  West  Florida  ?  and  that 
our  government,  having  interdicted  an  illicit  commerce  with  the  former, 
ought  not  to  have  interposed  in  relation  to  the  latter  ?  It  is  scarcely  nec- 
essary to  consume  your  time  by  remarking,  that  we  had  no  pretension  to 
that  island  ;  that  it  did  not  menace  our  repose,  nor  did  the  safety  of  the 


ON   THE   LINE   OF   THE  PERDIDO.  21 

United  States  require  that  they  should  occupy  it.  It  became,  therefore, 
our  duty  to  attend  to  the  just  remonstrance  of  France,  against  American 
citizens'  supplying  the  rebels  with  the  means  of  resisting  her  power. 

I  am  not,  sir,  in  favor  of  cherishing  the  passion  of  conquest.  But  I 
must  be  permitted,  in  conclusion,  to  indulge  the  hope  of  seeing,  ere  long, 
the  new  United  States  (if  you  will  allow  me  the  expression)  embracing, 
not  only  the  old  thirteen  States,  but  the  entire  country  east  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi, including  East  Florida,  and  some  of  the  territories  of  the  north 
of  us  also. 


ON  RENEWING  THE  CHARTER  OF  THE  FIRST 
BANK  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

IN  SENATE,  1811, 

[In  the  strifes  of  parties  in  Mr.  Clay's  time,  his  opponents 
never  forgot  to  accuse  hirn  of  changing  his  opinion  on  the  con- 
stitutionality of  a  national  bank,  as  if  it  were  a  reproach,  or  a 
grave  political  offense  ;  whereas  he  is  a  wise  man  who  changes 
for  sufficient  reasons,  and  a  bold  man  frankly  to  confess  it.  The 
change,  however,  in  this  case  of  Mr.  Clay,  was  only  apparent — 
certainly  not  inconsistent.  When  Mr.  Clay  opposed  the  re- 
charter  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States  in  1811,  the  country 
was  prosperous,  and  the  State  banks  in  a  sound  and  healthy 
condition.  But  the  war  of  1812  came  on,  during  which  most 
of  the  State  banks  suspended,  and  at  the  end  of  that  war,  the 
currency  of  the  country  was  in  a  most  deplorable  condition. 
The  General  Government  was  without  an  authorised  fiscal 
agent,  and  the  commerce  and  trade  of  the  country  languished 
for  lack  of  a  uniform  currency.  Although  the  nation  had  acqui- 
esced in  the  decision  of  Congress,  in  1811,  not  to  re-charter  the 
bank  of  the  United  States,  in  1816  there  was  a  universal  demand 
for  a  national  bank,  and  a  bill  being  brought  into  Congress  for 
that  object,  Mr.  Clay  advocated  it.  His  speech  not  having  been 
published,  he  afterward  delivered  an  address  to  his  constituents, 
in  explanation  of  the  reasons  of  his  course  as  differing  from  that 
of  1811,  when  he  opposed  the  re-charter  of  the  bank,  as  set  forth 
in  the  following  speech.  His  reasons  were,  first,  that  in  1811 
he  was  instructed  by  the  Legislature  of  Kentucky,  to  oppose  the 
renewal  of  the  charter,  and  that,  in  1816,  the  voice  of  his  con- 
stituents was  in  favor  of  a  national  bank.  Next,  in  1811,  he 
had  evidence  that  the  bank  had  used  its  power  to  subserve  the 
views  of  a  political  party,  but  the  provisions  of  the  new  bill,  in  1816, 
had  sufficiently  guarded  against  such  an  abuse  of  power  ;  and, 
lastly,  that  the  necessity  of  a  national  bank  was  not  apparent  in 
1811,  but  that  it  had  become  so  in  1816,  and  that  it  was  thus 


ON   THE    BANK    CHARTER.  23 

brought  within  the  specified  powers  of  the  Constitution.  In 
1816,  therefore,  all  doubts  as  to  the  constitutionality  of  a  national 
bank  were  removed,  in  which  all  parties  were  agreed. 

It  could  hardly  be  said,  therefore,  that  Mr.  Clay  changed  his 
opinion.  He  merely  adopted  a  course  indicated  by  the  light  of 
events.  In  1811  he  was  guided  by  events.  So  in  1816.  In 
statesmanship,  as  in  the  strategies  of  war,  leaders  are  forced  to 
change  their  position  .according  to  the  change  of  circumstances. 
This  is  not  necessarily  a  change  of  opinion  on  a  specified  ques- 
tion, when  the  question  itself  is  modified  by  events,  but  a  wise 
adaptation  of  policy  to  the  new  aspects  of  the  question.  The 
following  are  Mr.  Clay's  views  in  1811.  We  shall  see,  by-and- 
by,  what  they  were  in  1816.] 

Mr.  President — 

When  the  subject  involved  in  the  motion  now  under  consideration  was 
depending-  before  the  other  branch  of  the  Legislature,  a  disposition  to  ac 
quiesce  in  their  decision  was  evinced.  For  although  the  committee  who 
reported  this  bill,  had  been  raised  many  weeks  prior  to  the  determination 
of  that  House,  on  the  proposition  to  re-eharter  the  bank,  except  the  occa- 
sional reference  to  it  of  memorials  and  petitions,  we  scarcely  ever  heard  of 
it.  The  rejection,  it  is  true,  of  a  measure  brought  before  either  branch  of 
Congress,  does  not  absolutely  preclude  the  other  from  taking  up  the  same 
proposition ;  but  the  economy  of  our  time,  and  a  just  deference  for  the 
opinion  of  others,  would  seem  to  recommend  a  delicate  and  cautions  exer- 
cise of  this  power.  As  this  subject,  at  the  memorable  period  when  the 
charter  was  granted,  called  forth  the  best  talents  of  the  nation,  as  it  has, 
on  various  occasions,  undergone  the  most  thorough  investigation,  and  as 
we  can  hardly  expect  that  it  is  susceptible  of  receiving  any  further  eluci- 
dation, it  was  to  be  hoped  that  we  should  have  been  spared  useless  debate. 
This  was  the  more  desirable,  because  there  are,  I  conceive,  much  superior 
claims  upon  us  for  every  hour  of  the  small  portion  of  the  session  yet 
remaining  to  us.  Under  the  operation  of  these  motives,  I  had  resolved  to 
give  a  silent  vote,  until  I  felt  myself  hound,  by  the  defying  manner  of  the 
arguments  advanced  in  support  of  the  renewal,  to  obey  the  paramount 
duties  I  owe  my  country  and  its  Constitution,  to  make  one  effort,  however 
feeble,  to  avert  the  passage  of  what  appears  to  me  a  most  unjustifiable  law. 
After  my  honorable  friend  from  Virginia  (Mr.  Giles)  had  instructed  and 
amused  us  with  the  very  able  and  ingenious  argument  which  he  delivered 
on  yesterday,  I  should  have  still  forborne  to  trespass  on  the  Senate,  but  for 
the  extraordinary  character  of  his  speech.  lie  discussed  both  sides  of  the 
question,  with  great  ability  and  eloquence,  and  certainly  demonstrate  1,  to 
the  satisfaction  of  all  who  heard  him,  both  that  it  was  constitutional  and 
unconslitutional,  highly  proper  and  improper,  to  prolong  the  charter  of 


24  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

the  bank.  The  honorable  gentleman  appeared  to  me  in  the  predicament 
in  which  the  celebrated  orator  of  Virginia,  Patrick  Henry,  is  said  to  have 
been  once  placed.  Engaged  in  a  most  extensive  and  lucrative  practice  of 
the  law,  he  mistook,  in  one  instance,  the  side  of  the  cause  in  which  he  was 
retained,  and  addressed  the  court  and  jury  in  a  very  masterly  and  convin- 
cing speech,  in  behalf  of  his  antagonist.  His  distracted  client  came  up  to 
him,  while  he  was  thus  employed,  and,  interrupting  him,  bitterly  ex- 
claimed, "  You  have  undone  me !  You  have  ruined  me  !"  "  Never  mind, 
give  yourself  no  concern,"  said  the  adroit  advocate ;  and  turning  to  the 
court  and  jury,  continued  his  argument,  by  observing,  "  May  it  please  your 
honors,  and  you,  gentlemen  of  the  jury,  I  have  been  stating  to  you  what 
I  presume  my  adversary  may  urge  on  his  side.  I  will  now  show  you  how 
fallacious  his  reasonings,  and  groundless  his  pretensions,  are."  The  skill- 
ful orator  proceeded,  satisfactorily  refuted  every  argument  he  had  advanced, 
and  gained  his  cause  ! — a  success  with  which  I  trust  the  exertbn  of  my 
honorable  friend  will  on  this  occasion  be  crowneJ. 

It  has  been  said,  by  the  honorable  gentleman  from  Georgia  (Mr.  Craw- 
ford) that  this  has  been  made  a  party  question  ;  although  the  law  incorporat- 
ing the  bank  was  passed  prior  to  the  formation  of  parties,  and  when  Congress 
was  not  biased  by  party  prejudices.  (Mr.  Crawford  explained.  He  did 
not  mean,  that  it  had  been  made  a  party  question  in  the  Senate.  His 
allusion  was  elsewhere.)  I  did  not  think  it  altogether  fair,  to  refer  to  the 
discussions  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  as  gentlemen  belonging  to  that 
body  have  no  opportunity  of  defending  themselves  here.  It  is  true  that 
this  law  was  not  the  effect,  but  it  is  no  less  true  that  it  was  one  of  the  causes, 
of  the  political  divisions  in  this  country.  And  if,  during  the  agitation 
of  the  present  question,  the  renewal  has,  on  one  side,  been  opposed  on 
party  principles,  let  me  ask  if,  on  the  other,  it  has  not  been  advocated  on 
similar  principles.  Where  is  the  Macedonian  phalanx,  the  opposition,  in 
Congress  %  I  believe,  sir,  I  shall  not  incur  the  charge  of  presumptuous 
prophecy,  when  I  predict  we  shall  not  pick  up  from  its  ranks  one  single 
straggler  !  And  if,  on  this  occasion,  my  worthy  friend  from  Georgia  has 
gone'over  into  the  camp  of  the  enemy,  is  it  kind  in  him  to  look  back  upon 
his  former  friends,  and  rebuke  them  for  the  fidelity  with  which  they  adhere 
to  their  old  principles? 

I  shall  not  stop  to  examine  how  far  a  representative  is  bound  by  the  in- 
structions of  his  constituents.  That  is  a  question  between  the  giver  and 
receiver  of  the  instructions.  But  I  must  be  permitted  to  express  my  sur- 
prise at  the  pointed  difference  which  has  been  made  between  the  opinions 
and  instructions  of  State  Legislatures,  and  the  opinions  and  details  of  the 
deputations  with  which  we  have  been  surrounded  from  Philadelphia. 
While  the  resolutions  of  those  Legislatures— known,  legitimate,  constitu- 
tional, and  deliberative  bodies— have  been  thrown  into  the  back-ground,  and 
their  interference  regarded  as  officious,  these  delegations  from  self-created 
societies,  composed  of  nobody  knows  whom,  have  been  received  by  the 


ON    THE    BANK    CHARTER.  25 

committee,  with  the  utmost  complaisance.  Their  communications  have 
been  treasured  up  with  the  greatest  diligence.  Never  did  the  Delphic 
priests  collect  with  more  holy  care  the  frantic  expressions  of  the  agitated 
Pythia,  or  expound  them  with  more  solemnity  to  the  astonished  Grecians, 
than  has  the  committee  gathered  the  opinions  and  testimonies  of  these  dep- 
uties, and,  through  the  gentleman  from  Massachusetts,  pompously  detailed 
them  to  the  Senate  !  Philadelphia  has  her  immediate  representative,  cap- 
able of  expressing  her  wishes,  upon  the  floor  of  the  other  House.  If  it  be 
improper  for  States  to  obtrude  upon  Congress  their  sentiments,  it  is  much 
more  highly  so  for  the  unauthorized  deputies  of  fortuitous  congregations. 

The  first  singular  feature  that  attracts  attention  in  this  bill,  is  the  new 
and  unconstitutional  veto  which  it  establishes.  The  Constitution  has  re- 
quired only,  that  after  bills  have  passed  the  House  of  Representatives  and 
the  Senate,  they  shall  be  presented  to  the  president,  for  his  approval  or  re- 
jection ;  and  his  determination  is  to  be  made  known  in  ten  days.  But 
this  bill  provides,  that  when  all  the  constitutional  sanctions  are  obtained, 
and  when,  according  to  the  usual  routine  of  legislation,  it  ought  to  be  con- 
sidered as  a  law,  it  is  to  be  submitted  to  a  new  branch  of  the  Legislature, 
consisting  of  the  president  and  twenty-four  directors  of  the  bank  of  the 
United  States,  holding  their  sessions  in  Philadelphia ;  and  if  they  please 
to  approve  it,  why  then  it  is  to  become  a  law  !  And  three  months  (the 
term  allowed  by  our  law  of  May  last,  to  one  of  the  great  belligerents,  for 
revoking  his  edicts,  after  the  other  shall  have  repealed  his)  are  granted 
them,  to  decide  whether  an  act  of  Congress  shall  be  the  law  of  the  land 
or  not ! — an  act  which  is  said  to  be  indispensably  necessary  to  our  salva- 
tion, and  without  the  passage  of  which,  universal  distress  and  bankruptcy 
are  to  pervade  the  country.  Remember,  sir,  the  honorable  gentleman 
from  Georgia,  has  contended  that  this  charter  is  no  contract.  Does  it, 
then,  become  the  representatives  of  the  nation,  to  leave  the  nation  at  the 
mercy  of  a  corporation  ?  Ought  the  impending  calamities  to  be  left  to  the 
hazard  of  a  contingent  remedy  ? 

This  vagrant  power  to  erect  a  bank,  after  having  wandered  throughout 
the  whole  Constitution  in  quest  of  some  congenial  spot  to  fasten  upon,  has 
been  at  length  located  by  the  gentleman  from  Georgia  on  that  provision 
which  authorizes  Congress  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  etc.  In  1791,  the 
power  is  referred  to  one  part  of  the  instrument;  in  1811,  to  another. 
Sometimes  it  is  alleged  to  be  deducible  from  the  power  to  regulate  com- 
merce. Hard  pressed  here,  it  disappears,  and  shows  itself  under  the  grant 
to  coin  money.  The  sagacious  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  in  1791,  pur- 
sued the  wisest  course ;  he  has  taken  shelter  behind  general  high  sound- 
inn-  and  imposing  terms.  He  has  declared,  in  the  preamble  to  the  act 
establishing  the  bank,  that  it  will  be  very  conducive  to  the  successful  con- 
ducting of  the  national  finances;  will  tend  to  give  facility' to  the  obtaining 
of  loans,  and  will  be  productive  of  considerable  advantage  to  trade  and 
industry    in  general.     No  allusion   is  made  to  the   collection  of   taxes. 


26  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

What  is  the  nature  of  this  government  2     It  is  emphatically  federal,  vested 
with  an  agoregate  of  specified  powers  for  general  purposes,  conceded  by 
existing1  sovereignties,  who  have  themselves  retained  what  is  not  so  con- 
ceded.     It  is  said  that  there  are  cases  in  which    it  must  act  on  implied 
powers.     This  is  not  controverted,  but  the  implication  must  be  necessary, 
and  obviously  flow  from  the  enumerated  power  with  which  it  is  allied. 
The  power  to  charter  companies  is  not  specified  in  the  grant,  and  I  con- 
tend is  of  a  nature  not  transferable  by  mere  implication.     It  is  one  of  the 
most  exalted  attributes  of  sovereignty.     In  the  exercise   of  this  gigantic 
power  we  have  seen   an  East  India  company  created,  which   has  carried 
dismay,  desolation,  and  death,  throughout  one   of  the  largest  portions  of 
the  habitable  world — a   company  which  is,  in    itself,  a  sovereignty,  which 
has  subverted  empires  and  set  up   new  dynasties,  and  has  not  only  made 
war,  but  war  against  its  legitimate  sovereign  !     Under  the  influence  of 
this  power,  we  have  seen  arise   a  South   Sea  company,  and  a  Mississippi 
company,  that  distracted  and  convulsed  all  Europe,  and  menaced  a  total 
overthrow  of  all  credit  and  confidence,  and  universal  bankruptcy.     Is  it 
to  be  imagined  that  a  power  so  vast  would  have  been  left  by  the  wisdom 
of  the  Constitution  to  doubtful  inference  ?     It  has  been  alleged  that  there 
are  many  instances,  in  the  Constitution,  where  powers  in  their  nature  inci- 
dental, and  which  would  have  necessarily  been  vested  along  with  the  prin- 
cipal, are  nevertheless  expressly  enumerated ;  and  the  power  "  to  make 
rules  and  regulations  for  the  government  of  the  land  and  naval  forces," 
which  it  is  said  is  incidental  to  the  power  to  raise  armies  and  provide  a 
navy,  is  given  as  an  example.     What  does  this  prove?     How  extremely 
cautious  the  convention  were  to  leave  as  little  as   possible   to  implication. 
Iu  all  cases  where  incidental  powers  are  acted  upon,   the  principal  and 
incidental  ought  to  be  congenial  with  each  other,  and  partake  of  a  com- 
mon nature.     The  incidental  power  ought  to  be  strictly  subordinate  and 
limited  to  the  end  proposed  to  be  attained  by  the  specified  power.     In 
other  words,  under  the  name  of  accomplishing  one  object  which  is  speci- 
fied, the  power  implied  ought  not  to   be   made   to  embrace  other  objects, 
which  are  not  specified  in  the  Constitution.     If,  then,  you  could  establish 
a  bank,  to  collect  and  distribute  the  revenue,  it  ought  to  be  expressly  re- 
stricted to  the  purpose  of  such  collection  and  distribution.     It  is  mockery, 
worse  than  usurpation,  to  establish  it  for  a  lawful  object,  and  then   to  ex- 
tend it  to  other  objects  which  are  not  lawful.     In  deducing  the  power  to 
create  corporations,  such  as  I  have  described  it,  from  the  power  to  collect 
taxes,  the  relation  and  condition  of  principal  and  incident  are  prostrated 
and  destroyed.     The   accessory  is  exalted  above  the  principal.     As  well 
might  it  be  said,  that  the  great  luminary  of  day  is  an   accessory,  a  satel- 
lite, to  the  humblest  star  that  twinkles  forth  its  feeble  light  in  the  firma- 
ment of  heaven  ! 

Suppose  the  Constitution  had  been  silent  as  to  an  individual  department 
of  this  government,  could  you,  under  the  power  to  lay  and  collect  taxes 


ON   THE   BANK    CHARTER.  27 

establish  a  judiciary  ?  I  presume  not ;  but  if  you  could  derive  the 
power  by  mere  implication,  could  you  vest  it  with  any  other  authority 
than  to  enforce  the  collection  of  the  revenue  ?  A  bank  is  made  for  the 
ostensible  purpose  of  aiding  in  the  collection  of  the  revenue,  and  while 
it  is  engaged  in  this,  the  most  inferior  and  subordinate  of  all  its  func- 
tions, it  is  made  to  diffuse  itself  throughout  society,  and  to  influence  all 
the  great  operations  of  credit,  circulation,  and  commerce.  Like  the  Vir- 
ginia justice,  you  tell  the  man  whose  turkey  had  been  stolen,  that  your 
books  of  precedent  furnish  no  form  for  his  case,  but  that  you  will  grant 
him  a  precept  to  search  for  a  cow,  and  when  looking  for  that  he  may 
possibly  find  his  turkey !  You  say  to  this  corporation,  we  can  not  author- 
ize you  to  discount,  to  emit  paper,  to  regulate  commerce,  etc.  No  !  Our 
book  has  no  precedents  of  that  kind.  But  then  we  can  authorize  you  to 
collect  the  revenue,  and,  while  occupied  with  that,  you  may  do  whatever 
else  you  please  ! 

What  is  a  corporation,  such  as  the  bill  contemplates  ?     It  is  a  splendid 
association  of  favored  individuals,  taken  from  the  mass  of  society,  and  in- 
vested  with   exemptions    and   surrounded  by  immunities  and  privileges. 
The  honorable  gentleman  from  Massachusetts   (Mr.  Lloyd)  has  said,  that 
the  original  law,  establishing  the  bank,  was  justly  liable  to  the  objection  of 
vesting  in  that  institution  an  exclusive  privilege,  the  faith   of  the  govern- 
ment being  pledged,  that  no  other  bank  should  be  authorized  during  its 
existence.     This  objection,  he  supposes,  is  obviated  by  the  bill  under  con- 
sideration; but   all  corporations  enjoy  exclusive  privileges;  that  is,   the 
corporators  have   privileges  which  no   others  possess ;  if  you  create  fifty 
corporations  instead  of  one,  you  have  only  fifty  privileged  bodies  instead 
of  one.     I  contend  that  the  States  have  the  exclusive  power  to  regulate 
contracts,  to  declare   the   capacities   and  incapacities  to  contract,  and  to 
provide  as  to  the  extent  of  responsibility  of  debtors  to  their  ere  liters.     If 
Congress  have  the  power  to  erect  an   artificial   body,  and  say  it  shall  be 
endowed  with  the  attributes  of  an  individual ;  if  you   can  bestow  on  this 
object  of  your  own  creation  the   ability  to  contract,  may  you  not,  in  con- 
travention of  State  rights,   confer  upon  slaves,  infants,  and  femes  covert 
the  ability  to  contract  ?     And  if  you  have  the  power  to  say  that  an  asso- 
ciation of  individuals  shall  be  responsible  for  their  debts  only  in  a  certain 
limited  degree,  what  is  to  prevent  an  extension  of  a  similar  exemption  to 
individuals  ?     Where  is  the   limitation  upon  this  power  to  set  up  corpora- 
tions %     You  establish  one  in  the  heart  of  a  State,  the   basis   of  whose 
capital  is  money.     You  may  erect  others   whose  capital   shall  consist  of 
land,  slaves,  and  personal  estates,  and  thus  the  whole  property  within  the 
jurisdiction  of  a  State  might  be  absorbed  by  these  political  bodies.     The 
existing  bank  contends  that  it  is  beyond  the  power  of  a  State  to  tax  it,  and 
if  this  pretension  be  well  founded,  it  is  in  the  power  of  Congress,  by  chart- 
ering companies,  to  dry  up  all  the  sources  of  State  revenue.     Georgia  has 
undertaken,  it  is  true,  to  levy  a  tax  on  the  branch  within  her  jurisdiction, 


28  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY   CLAY. 

but  this  law,  now  under  a  course  of  litigation,  is  considered  as  invalid. 
The  United  States  own  a  great  deal  of  land  in  the  State  of  Ohio ;  can 
this  government,  for  the  purpose  of  creating  an  ability  to  purchase  it, 
charter  a  company  ?  Aliens  are  forbidden,  I  believe,  in  that  State,  to 
hold  real  estate  ;  could  you,  in  order  to  multiply  purchasers,  confer  upon 
them  the  capacity  to  hold  land,  in  derogation  of  the  local  law  ?  I  im- 
agine this  will  be  hardly  insisted  upon  ;  and  yet  there  exists  a  more  ob- 
vious connection  between  the  undoubted  power  which  is  possessed  by  this 
government,  to  sell  its  land,  and  the  means  of  executing  that  power  by 
increasing-  the  demand  in  the  market,  than  there  is  between  this  bank  and 
the  collection  of  a  tax.  This  government  has  the  power  to  levy  taxes,  to 
raise  armies,  provide  a  navy,  make  war,  regulate  commerce,  coin  money, 
etc.,  etc.  It  would  not  be  difficult  to  show  as  intimate  a  connection  be- 
tween a  corporation,  established  for  any  purpose  whatever,  and  some  one 
or  other  of  those  great  powers,  as  there  is  between  the  revenue  and  the 
bank  of  the  United  States. 

Let  us  inquire  into  the  actual  participation  of  this  bank  in  the  collection 
of  the  revenue.  Prior  to  the  passage  of  the  act  of  1800,  requiring  the 
collectors  of  those  ports  of  entry,  at  which  the  principal  bank,  or  any  of 
its  offices  are  situated,  to  deposit  with  them  the  custom-house  bonds,  it 
had  not  the  smallest  agency  in  the  collection  of  the  duties.  During  al- 
most one  moiety  of  the  period  to  which  the  existence  of  this  institution 
was  limited,  it  was  nowise  instrumental  in  the  collection  of  that  revenue 
to  which  it  is  now  become  indispensable  !  The  collection,  previous  to 
1800,  was  made  entirely  by  the  collectors;  and  even  at  present  where 
thee  is  one  port  of  entry,  at  which  this  bank  is  employed,  there  are 
eiffht  or  ten  at  which  the  collection  is  made  as  it  was  before  1800.  Aud, 
sir,  what  does  this  bank  or  its  branches,  where  resort  is  had  to  it  ?  It  does 
not  adjust  with  the  merchant  the  amount  of  duty,  nor  take  his  bond ; 
nor,  if  the  bond  is  not  paid,  coerce  the  payment  by  distress  or  otherwise. 
In  fact,  it  has  no  active  agency  whatever  in  the  collection.  Its  operation 
is  merely  passive ;  that  is,  if  the  obligor,  after  his  bond  is  placed  in  the 
bank,  discharges  it,  all  is  very  well.  Such  is  the  mighty  aid  afforded  by 
this  tax-gatherer,  without  which  the  government  can  not  get  along ! 
Again,  it  is  not  pretended  that  the  very  limited  assistance  which  this  in- 
stitution does  in  truth  render,  extends  to  any  other  than  a  single  species 
of  tax,  that  is,  duties.  In  the  collection  of  the  excise,  the  direct  and  other 
internal  taxes,  no  aid  was  derived  from  any  bank.  It  is  true,  in  the  col- 
lection of  those  taxes,  the  former  did  not  obtain  the  same  indulgence 
which  the  merchant  receives  in  paying  duties.  But  what  obliges  Congress 
to  give  credit  at  all  ?  Could  it  not  demand  prompt  payment  of  the  duties  ? 
And,  in  fact,  does  it  not  so  demand  in  many  instances  ?  Whether  credit 
is  given  or  not  is  a  matter  merely  of  discretion.  If  it  be  a  facility  to  mer- 
cantile operations  (as  I  presume  it  is)  it  ought  to  be  granted.  But  I  deny 
the  right  to  engraft  upon  it  a  bank,  which  you  would  not  otherwise  have 


ON    THE    BANK    CHARTER.  29 

the  power  to  erect.  You  can  not  create  the  necessity  of  a  bank,  and 
then  plead  that  necessity  for  its  establishment.  In  the  administration  of 
the  finances,  the  bank  acts  simply  as  a  payer  and  receiver.  The  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury  has  money  in  New  York,  and  wants  it  in  Charleston  ;  the 
bank  will  furnish  him  with  a  check  or  bill,  to  make  the  remittance,  which 
any  merchant  would  do  just  as  well. 

I  will   now  proceed  to   show  by  fact,  actual  experience,  not  theoretic 
reasoning  but  by  the  records  of  the  treasury  themselves,  that  the  opera- 
tions of  that  department  may  be  as  well  conducted  without  as  with  this 
bank.     The  delusion  has  consisted  in   the   use  of  certain  high-sounding 
phrases,  dexterously  used  on  the  occasion  ;  "  the  collection  of  the  revenue," 
"the  administration  of  the  finance,"  "  the  conducting  of  the  fiscal  affairs  of 
the  government,"  the  usual  language  of  the  advocates  of  the  bank,  extort 
express  assent,  or  awe  into  acquiescence,  without  inquiry  or  examination 
into  its  necessity.     About  the  commencement  of  this  year  there  appears, 
by  the  report   of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,   of  the   Vth   of  January, 
to  have  been  a  little  upward  of  two  million  and  four  hundred  thousand 
dollars  in   the  treasury  of  the  United  States  ;  and  more  than  one  third  of 
this  whole  sum  was  in  the  vaults  of  local   banks.     In  several  instances, 
where  opportunities  existed  of  selecting  the  bank,  a  preference  has  been 
given  to  the  State  bank,  or  at  least  a  portion  of  the  deposits  has  been  made 
with  it.     In  New  York,  for  example,  there  were  deposited  with  the  Man- 
hattan bank  one  hundred  and  eighty-eight   thousand  six  hundred   and 
seventy  dollars,  although  a  branch  bank  is  in  that  city.     In  this  District, 
one  hundred  and  fifteen  thousand  and  eighty  dollars  were  deposited  with 
the  bank  of  Columbia,  although  here  also  is  a  branch   bank,  and  yet  the 
State  banks  are  utterly  unsafe  to  be  trusted  !    If  the  money,  after  the  bonds 
are  collected,  is  thus  placed  with  t^ese  banks,  I  presume  there  can  be  no 
difficulty  in  placing  the  bonds  themselves  there,  if  they  must  be  deposited 
with  some  bank  for  collection,  which  I  deny. 

Again,  one  of  the  most  important  and  complicated  branches  of  the 
treasury  department,  is  the  management  of  our  landed  system.  The  sales 
have,  in  some  years,  amounted  to  upward  of  half  a  million  of  dollars,  and 
are  generally  made  upon  credit,  and  yet  no  bank  whatever  is  made  use  of 
to  facilitate  the  collection.  After  it  is  made,  the  amount,  in  some  instances, 
has  been  deposited  with  banks,  and,  according  to  the  Secretary's  report, 
which  I  have  before  adverted  to,  the  amount  so  deposited,  was,  in  January, 
upward  of  three  hundred  thousand  dollars,  not  one  cent  of  which  was  in 
the  vaults  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States,  or  in  any  of  its  branches,  but  in 
the  bank  of  Pennsylvania,  its  branch  at  Pittsburg,  the  Marietta  bank, 
and  the  Kentucky  bank.  Upon  the  point  of  responsibility,  I  can  not  sub- 
scribe to  the  opinion  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  if  it  is  meant  that 
the  ability  to  pay  the  amount  of  any  deposits  which  the  government  may 
make,  under  any  exigency,  is  greater  than  that  of  the  State  banks  ;  that 
the  accountability  of  a  ramified  institution,   whose   affairs   are  managed 


30  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

by  a  single  head,  responsible  for  all  its  members,  is  more  simple  tban  that 
of  a  number  of  independent  and  unconnected  establishments,  I  shall  not 
deny  ;  but,  with  regard  to  safety,  I  am  strongly  inclined  to  think  it  is  on 
the  side  of  the  local  banks.  The  corruption  or  misconduct  of  the  parent, 
or  any  of  its  branches,  may  bankrupt  or  destroy  the  whole  system,  and 
the  loss  of  the  government  in  that  event,  will  be  of  the  deposits  made 
with  each  ;  whereas,  in  the  failure  of  one  State  bank,  the  loss  will  be 
confined  to  the  deposit  in  the  vault  of  that  bank.  It  is  said  to  have  been 
a  part  of  Burr's  plan  to  seize  on  the  branch  bank,  at  New  Orleaus.  At 
that  period  large  sums,  imported  from  La  Vera  Cruz,  are  alleged  to  have 
been  deposited  with  it,  and  if  the  traitor  had  accomplished  the  design,  the 
bank  of  the  United  States,  if  not  actually  bankrupt,  might  have  been  con- 
strained to  stop  payment. 

It  is  urged  by  the  gentleman  from  Massachusetts  (Mr.  Lloyd),  that  as 
this  nation  advances  in  commerce,  wealth,  and  population,  new  energies 
will  be  unfolded,  new  wants  and  exigences  will  arise,  and  hence  he  infers 
that  powers  must  be  implied  from  the  Constitution.  But,  sir,  the  question 
is,  shall  wre  stretch  the  instrument  to  embrace  cases  not  fairly  within  its 
scope,  or  shall  we  resort  to  that  remedy,  by  amendment,  which  the  Consti- 
tution prescribes  ? 

Gentlemen  contend,  that  the  construction  which  they  give  to  the  Con- 
stitution has  been  acquiesced  in  by  all  parties  and  under  all  administra- 
tions; and  they  rely  particularly  on  an  act  which  passed  in  1804,  for 
extending  a  branch  to  New  Orleans  ;  and  another  act  of  1807,  for  punish- 
ing those  who  should  forge  or  utter  forged  paper  of  the  bank.  With 
regard  to  the  first  law,  passed,  no  doubt,  upon  the  recommendation  of  the 
treasury  department,  I  would  remark,  that  it  was  the  extension  of  a  branch 
to  a  territory  over  which  Congress  possesses  the  power  of  legislation  almost 
uncontrolled,  and  where,  without  any  constitutional  impediment,  charters 
of  incorporation  may  be  granted.  As  to  the  other  act,  it  was  passed  no 
less  for  the  benefit  of  the  community  than  the  bank ;  to  protect  the  ignor- 
ant and  unwary  from  counterfeit  paper,  purporting  to  have  been  emitted  by 
the  bank.  "When  gentlemen  are  claiming  the  advantage  supposed  to 
be  deducible  from  acquiescence,  let  me  inquire  what  they  would  have  had 
those  to  do  who  believed  the  establishment  of  a  bank  an  encroachment 
upon  State  rights.  Were  they  to  have  resisted,  and  how?  By  force? 
Upon  the  change  of  parties  in  1800,  it  must  be  well  recollected,  that  the 
greatest  calamities  were  predicted  as  a  consequence  of  that  event.  Inten- 
tions were  ascribed  to  the  new  occupants  of  power,  of  violating  the  public 
faith,  and  prostrating  national  credit.  Under  such  circumstances,  that 
they  should  act  with  great  circumspection  was  quite  natural.  They  saw 
in  full  operation  a  bank,  chartered  by  a  Congress  who  had  as  much  right 
to  judge  of  their  constitutional  powers  as  their  successors.  Had  they  re- 
voked the  law  which  gave  it  existence,  the  institution  would,  in  all  proba- 
bility, have  continued  to  transact  business  notwithstanding.     The  judiciary 


ON   THE   BANK    CHARTER.  31 

would  have  been  appealed  to,  and  from  the  known  opinions  and  predilec- 
tions of  the  judges  then  composing  it,  they  would  have  pronounced  the 
act  of  incorporation,  as  in  the  nature  of  a  contract,  beyond  the  repealing 
power  of  any  succeeding  Legislature.  And,  sir,  what  a  scene  of  con- 
fusion would  such  a  state  of  things  have  presented :  an  act  of  Congress, 
which  was  law  in  the  statute-book,  and  a  nullity  on  the  judicial  records  ! 
was  it  not  the  wisest  to  wait  the  natural  dissolution  of  the  corporation 
rather  than  accelerate  that  event  by  a  repealing  law  involving  so  many 
delicate  considerations  ? 

When  gentlemen  attempt  to  carry  this  measure  upon  the*  ground  of 
acquiescence  or  precedent,  do  they  forget  that  we  are  not  in  Westminster 
Hall  ?  In  courts  of  justice,  the  utility  of  uniform  decision  exacts  of  the 
judge  a  conformity  to  the  adjudication  of  his  predecessor.  In  the  inter- 
pretation and  administration  of  the  law,  this  practice  is  wise  and  proper, 
and  without  it,  every  thing  depending  upon  the  caprice  of  the  judge,  we 
should  have  no  security  for  our  dearest  rights.  It  is  far  otherwise  when 
applied  to  the  source  of  legislation.  Here  no  rule  exists  but  the  Consti- 
tution, and  to  legislate  upon  the  ground  merely  that  our  predecessors 
thought  themselves  authorized,  under  similar  circumstances,  to  legislate,  is 
to  sanctify  error  and  perpetuate  usurpation.  But  if  we  are  to  be  subjected 
to  the  trammels  of  precedent,  I  claim,  on  the  other  hand,  the  benefit  of  the 
restrictions  under  which  the  intelligent  judge  cautiously  receives  them.  It 
is  an  established  rule,  that  to  give  to  a  previous  adjudication  any  effect,  the 
mind  of  the  judge  who  pronounced  it  must  have  been  awakened  to  the 
subject,  and  it  must  have  been  a  deliberate  opinion  formed  after  full  ar- 
ffument.  In  technical  lamma^e,  it  must  not  have  been  sub  silcntio.  Now 
the  acts  of  1804  and  1807,  relied  upon  as  pledges  for  the  re-chartering  of 
this  company,  passed  not  only  without  any  discussions  whatever  of  the 
constitutional  power  of  Congress  to  establish  a  bank,  but,  I  venture  to 
say,  without  a  single  member  having  had  his  attention  drawn  to  this  ques- 
tion. I  had  the  honor  of  a  seat  in  the  Senate  when  the  latter  law  passed, 
probably  voted  for  it,  and  I  declare,  with  the  utmost  sincerity,  that  I  never 
once  thought  of  that  point,  and  I  appeal  confidently  to  every  honorable 
member  who  was  then  present,  to  say  if  that  was  not  his  situation. 

This  doctrine  of  precedents,  applied  to  the  Legislature,  appears  to  me 
to  be  fraught  with  the  most  mischievous  consequences.  The  great  ad- 
vantage of  our  system  of  government  over  all  others,  is,  that  we  have  a 
written  Constitution  defining  its  limits  and  prescribing  its  authorities ;  and 
that  however  for  a  time  faction  may  convulse  the  nation,  and  passion  and 
party  prejudice  sway  its  functionaries,  the  season  of  reflection  will  recur 
when,  calmly  retracing  their  deeds,  all  aberrations  from  fundamental  prin- 
ciple will  be  corrected.  But  once  substitute  practice  for  principle ;  the 
exposition  of  the  Constitution  for  the  text  of  the  Constitution,  and  in  vain 
shall  we  look  for  the  instrument  in  the  instrument  itself!  It  will  be  as 
diffused  and  intangible  as  the  pretended  Constitution  of  England  ;    and 


32  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

must  be  sought  for  in  the  statute-book,  in  the  fugitive  journals  of  Con- 
gress, and  in  the  reports  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury !  What  would 
be  our  condition  if  we  were  to  take  the  interpretations  given  to  that 
sacred  book,  which  is,  or  ought  to  be,  the  criterion  of  our  faith,  for  the 
book  itself?  We  should  find  the  Holy  Bible  buried  beneath  the  inter- 
pretations, glosses,  and  comments  of  council,  synods,  and  learned  divines, 
which  have  produced  swarms  of  intolerant  and  furious  sects,  partaking  less 
of  the  mildness  and  meekness  of  their  origin  than  of  a  vindictive  spirit 
of  hostility  toward  each  other !  They  ought  to  afford  us  a  solemn  warn- 
ing to  make  that  Constitution,  which  we  have  sworn  to  support,  our  in- 
variable guide. 

I  conceive,  then,  sir,  that  we  were  not  empowered  by  the  Constitution, 
nor  bound  by  any  practice  under  it,  to  renew  the  charter  of  this  bank, 
and  I  might  here  rest  the  argument.  But  as  there  are  strong  objections 
to  the  renewal  on  the  score  of  expediency,  and  as  the  distresses  which  will 
attend  the  dissolution  of  the  bank  have  been  greatly  exaggerated,  I  will 
ask  for  your  indulgence  for  a  few  moments  longer.  That  some  temporary 
inconvenience  will  arise,  I  shall  not  deny  ;  but  most  groundlessly  have  the 
recent  failures  in  New  York  been  attributed  to  the  discontinuance  of  this 
bank.  As  well  might  you  ascribe  to  that  cause  the  failures  of  Amsterdam 
and  Hamburg,  of  London  and  Liverpool.  The  embarrassments  of  com- 
merce, the  sequestrations  in  France,  the  Danish  captures;  in  fine,  the 
belligerent  edicts,  are  the  obvious  sources  of  these  failures.  Their  imme- 
diate cause  is  the  return  of  bills  upon  London,  drawn  upon  the  faith  of 
unproductive  or  unprofitable  shipments.  Yes,  sir,  the  protest  of  the 
notaries  of  London,  not  those  of  New  York,  have  occasioned  these  bank- 
ruptcies. 

The  power  of  a  nation  is  said  to  consist  in  the  sword  and  the  purse. 
Perhaps,  at  last,  all  power  is  resolvable  into  that  of  the  purse,  for  with 
it  you  may  command  almost  every  thing  else.  The  specie  circulation  of 
the  United  States  is  climated  by  some  calculators  at  ten  millions  of  dol- 
lars, and  if  it  be  no  more,  one  moiety  is  in  the  vaults  of  this  bank.  May 
not  the  time  arrive  when  the  concentration  of  such  a  vast  portion  of  the 
circulating  medium  of  the  country,  in  the  hands  of  any  corporation,  will 
be  dangerous  to  our  liberties  ?  By  whom  is  this  immense  power  wielded  ? 
By  a  body  that,  in  derogation  of  the  great  principle  of  all  our  institutions, 
responsibility  to  the  people,  is  amenable  only  to  a  few  stockholders,  and 
they  chiefly  foreigners.  Suppose  an  attempt  to  subvert  this  government; 
would  not  the  traitor  first  aim,  by  force  or  corruption,  to  acquire  the  treas- 
ure of  this  company  ?  Look  at  it  in  another  aspect.  Seven  tenths  of  its 
capital  are  in  the  hands  of  foreigners,  and  these  foreigners  chiefly  English 
subjects.  We  are  possibly  on  the  eve  of  a  rupture  with  that  nation. 
Should  such  an  event  occur,  do  you  apprehend  that  the  English  premier 
would  experience  any  difficulty  in  obtaining  the  entire  control  of  this  in- 
stitution ?     Republics,  above  all  other  governments,  ought  most  seriously 


ON    THE   BANK    CHARTER.  33 

to  guard  against  foreign  influence.  All  history  proves  that  the  internal 
dissensions  excited  by  foreign  intrigue  have  produced  the  downfall  of  al- 
most every  free  government  that  has  hitherto  existed  ;  and  yet  gentlemen 
contend  that  we  are  benefited  by  the  possession  of  this  foreign  capital !  If 
we  could  have  its  use,  without  its  attending  abuse,  I  should  be  gratified 
also.  But  it  is  vain  to  expect  the  one  without  the  other.  Wealth  is 
power,  and,  under  whatsoever  form  it  exists,  its  proprietor,  whether  he 
lives  on  this  or  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic,  will  have  a  proportionate  in- 
fluence. It  is  argued  that  our  possession  of  this  English  capital  gives  us 
a  great  influence  over  the  British  government.  If  this  reasoning  be 
sound,  we  had  better  revoke  the  interdiction  as  to  aliens  holding  land, 
and  invite  foreigners  to  engross  the  whole  property,  real  and  personal,  of 
the  country.  We  had  better  at  once  exchange  the  condition  of  inde- 
pendent proprietors  for  that  of  stewards.  We  should  then  be  able  to  gov- 
ern foreign  nations,  according  to  the  reasoning  of  the  gentlemen  on  the 
other  side.  But  let  us  put  aside  this  theory  and  appeal  to  the  decisions 
of  experience.  Go  to  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic  and  see  what  has 
been  achieved  for  us  there,  by  Englishmen  holding  seven  tenths  of  the 
capital  of  this  bank.  Has  it  released  from  galling  and  ignominious  bond- 
age one  solitary  American  seaman,  bleeding  under  British  oppression  ? 
Did  it  prevent  the  unmanly  attack  upon  the  Chesapeake1}  Did  it  arrest  the 
promulgation,  or  has  it  abrogated  the  orders  in  council — those  orders 
which  have  given  birth  to  a  new  era  in  commerce  ?  In  spite  of  all  its 
boasted  effect,  are  not  the  two  nations  brought  to  the  very  brink  of  war  ? 
Are  we  quite  sure  that,  on  this  side  of  the  water,  it  has  had  no  effect 
favorable  to  British  interests  ?  It  has  often  been  stated,  and  although  I  do 
not  know  that  it  is  susceptible  of  strict  proof,  I  believe  it  to  be  a  fact, 
that  this  bank  exercised  its  influence  in  support  of  Jay's  treaty ;  and  may 
it  not  have  contributed  to  blunt  the  public  sentiment,  or  paralyze  the  ef- 
forts of  this  nation  against  British  aggression  ? 

The  Duke  of  Northumberland  is  said  to  be  the  most  considerable 
stockholder  in  the  bank  of  the  United  States.  A  late  lord  chancellor  of 
England,  besides  other  noblemen,  was  a  large  stockholder.  Suppose  the 
Prince  of  Essling,  the  Duke  of  Cadore,  and  other  French  dignitaries, 
owned  seven  eighths  of  the  capital  of  this  bank,  should  we  witness  the 
same  exertions  (I  allude  not  to  any  made  in  the  Senate)  to  re-charter  it  ? 
So  far  from  it,  would  not  the  danger  of  French  influence  be  resounded 
throughout  the  nation  ? 

I  shall  therefore,  give  my  most  hearty  assent  to  the  motion  for  striking 
out  the  first  section  of  the  bill. 

3 


ON  THE  INCREASE  OF  MILITARY  FORCE. 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES,  DECEMBER  31,  1811. 

[We  now  find  Mr.  Clay  in  the  House  of  Eepresentatives,  of 
which  he  was  chosen  Speaker  by  the  first  ballot  ;  and  we  find 
the  country  on  the  eve  of  a  war  with  Great  Britain,  looking  to 
Mr.  Clay  as  the  leader  of  the  war  party.  Great  as  were  the 
provocations  to  war,  and  inevitable  as  war  seemed  to  be,  there  was, 
nevertheless,  a  strong  and  talented  party  against  it,  composed, 
chiefly  of  those  designated  by  the  name  of  Federalists.  From 
the  administration  of  John  Adams  down  to  this  time,  there  was 
eminent  talent  in  this  party,  and  that  must  have  been  a  strong 
administration  which  could  stand  up  against  such  a  powerful 
opposition,  and  stir  up  the  nation  to  war.  But  the  wrongs  of 
Great  Britain  had  roused  the  spirit  of  the  American  people. 
Mr.  Clay,  as  will  be  seen,  was,  at  this  time,  the  popular  leader  of 
the  Democratic  party.  He  was  never  any  other  than  a  Demo- 
crat, from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  his  career,  though  he  be- 
came the  head  of  a  party  which  bore  the  name  of  Whig.  It 
belongs  to  history  to  show  that  this  party  were  the  only  true 
Democrats  of  the  country.  Mr.  Clay  never  changed.  His  po- 
litical birth  was  in  the  Jeffersonian  family,  and  he  died  a  Jef- 
fersonian  Democrat.  In  the  following  speech  we  find  him 
enacting  the  part  of  the  gallant  chieftain  of  the  Democratic 
ranks.  The  Jackson  Democracy  was  mongrel,  and  like  all 
broods  of  this  category  of  races,  it  was  doomed  to  degenerate,  as 
it  has  done,  till  the  last  drop  of  Democratic  blood  has  disap- 
peared. 

But  here,  in  this  speech  of  Mr.  Clay,  in  which  he  began  to 
rouse  the  nation  to  arms  against  Great  Britain,  we  behold  the 
unadulterated  Democrat  of  the  Madisonian  era.  By  the  advice 
of  his  political  friends,  Mr.  Clay  had  left  the  Senate  and  gone 
into  the  House  of  Eepresentatives,  because  he  was  wanted  as 
leader  in  the  popular  branch  of  the  government,  and  the  first 
speech  we  have  on  record  from  him  in  that  place,  is  that  which 


ON   THE   INCREASE   OF   MILITARY   FORCE.  35 

follows.  We  need  not  say,  for  it  will  speak  for  itself,  that  it  is 
manly,  bold,  and  defiant,  in  presence  of  the  British  lion,  which 
had  roared  and  shaken  his  mane  to  intimidate  the  American 
people.  It  was  in  circumstances  like  these  that  Mr.  Clay,  in 
Committee  of  the  Whole,  opened  this  great  and  momentous 
debate,  in  support  of  a  bill  to  augment  the  military  force  of  the 
nation  in  preparation  for  war.  Mr.  Clay  was  now  placed  in  the 
position  which,  of  all  men  in  the  country,  he  was  best  qualified 
to  fill ;  and  every  body,  the  whole  nation,  felt  that  that  was  his 
place.  On  the  eve  of  a  war  with  the  greatest  maritime  power 
in  the  world,  the  nation  wanted  a  leader  of  recognized  talent,  of 
skill  in  affairs  of  state,  of  boldness  and  of  prudence,  of  decision 
and  of  energy,  and  of  lion-like  courage — and  Mr.  Clay  was  that 
man.] 

Mr.  Clay  (in  Committee  of  the  Whole*)  said,  that  when  the  subject 
of  this  bill  was  before  the  House  in  the  abstract  form  of  a  resolution, 
proposed  by  the  committee  of  foreign  relations,  it  was  the  pleasure  of  the 
House  to  discuss  it  while  he  was  in  the  chair.  He  did  not  complain  of 
this  course  of  proceeding,  for  be  did  not  at  any  time  wish  the  House,  from 
considerations  personal  to  him,  to  depart  from  that  mode  of  transacting 
the  public  business  which  they  thought  best,  He  merely  adverted  to  the 
circumstance  as  an  apology  for  the  trouble  he  was  about  to  give  the  com- 
mittee. He  was  at  all  times  disposed  to  take  his  share  of  the  responsi- 
bility, and,  under  this  impression,  he  felt  that  he  owed  it  to  his  constitu- 
ents and  to  himself,  before  the  committee  rose,  to  submit  to  their  attention 
a  few  observations. 

He  saw  with  regret  a  diversity  of  opinion  among  those  who  had  the 
happiness  generally  to  act  together,  in  relation  to  the  quantum  of  force 
proposed  to  be  raised.  For  his  part,  he  thought  it  was  too  great  for  peace^ 
and  he  feared  too  small  for  war.  He  had  been  in  favor  of  the  number 
recommended  by  the  Senate,  and  he  would  ask  gentlemen,  who  had  pre- 
ferred fifteen  thousand,  to  take  a  candid  and  dispassionate  view  of  the  sub- 
ject. It  was  admitted,  on  all  hands,  that  it  was  a  force  to  be  raised  for 
the  purposes  of  war,  and  to  be  kept  up  and  used  only  in  the  event  of  war. 
It  was  further  conceded,  that  its  principal  destination  would  be  the  prov- 
inces of  our  enemy.  By  the  bill  which  had  been  passed,  to  complete  the 
peace  establishment,  we  had  authorized  the  collection  of  a  force  of  about 
six  thousand  men,  exclusive  of  those  now  in  service,  which,  with  the 
twenty-five  thousand  provided  for  by  this  bill,  will  give  an  aggregate  of  new 

*  We  are  not  aware  of  any  parliamentary  rale  that  the  Speaker  of  the  House 
should  not  vacate  the  chair,  by  putting  another  member  in  it  when  he  wishes  to 
make  a  speech ;  but  custom  seems  to  have  conceded  that  the  Speaker  should  avail 
himself  of  the  Committee  of  the  Whole  for  his  own  remarks. 


36  SPEECHES    OF    HENKY    CLAY. 

troops  of  thirty- one   thousand  men.     Experience  in  military  affairs   has 
shown  that,  when  any  given  number  of  men  is  authorized  to  be  raised, 
you  must,  in  counting  upon  the  effective  men  which  it  will  produce,  de- 
duct one  fourth  or  one  third  for  desertion,  sickness,  and  other  incidents  to 
which  raw  troops  are  peculiarly  exposed.     In  measures  relating  to  war,  it 
is  wisest,  if  you  err  at  all,  to  err  on  the  side  of  the  largest  force,  and  you 
will  consequently  put  down  your  thirty-one  thousand  men  at  no  more  than 
an  effective  force,  in  the  field,  of  about  twenty-one  thousand.     This,  with 
the  four  thousand  now  in  service,  will  amount  to  twenty-five  thousand  ef- 
fective men.     The  Secretary  of  War  has  stated  in  his  report  that,  for  the 
single    purpose    of  manning  your  forts   and  garrisons   on  the  sea-board, 
twelve  thousand  and  six  hundred  men  are  necessary.     Although  the  whole 
of  that  number  will  not  be  taken  from  the  twenty-five  thousand,  a  portion 
of  it,  probably,  will  be.     We  are  told  that,  in  Canada,  there  are  between 
seven  and  eight  thousand  regular  troops.     If  it  is  invaded  the  whole  of 
that  force  will  be  concentrated  in  Quebec,  and  would  you  attempt  that  al- 
most impregnable  fortress  with  less  than  double  the  force  of  the  besieged  ? 
Gentlemen  who  calculate   upon  volunteers  as   a  substitute  for   regulars 
ought  not  to  deceive  themselves.     No  man  appreciated  higher  than  he  did 
the   spirit   of   the    country.     But,    although    volunteers   were   admirably 
adapted  to  the  first  operations  of  the  war,  to  the  making  of  a  first  impres- 
sion, he  doubted  their  fitness  for  a  regular  siege,  or  for  the  manning  and 
garrisoning  of  forts.     He  understood  it  was  a  rule  in  military  affairs,  never 
to  leave  in  the  rear  a  place  of  any  strength  undefended.   Canada  is  invaded ; 
the  upper  part  falls,  and  you  proceed  to  Quebec.    It  is  true  there  would  be 
no  European  army  behind  to  be  apprehended :  but  the  people  of  the  coun- 
try might  rise  ;  and  he  warned  gentlemen  who  imagined  that  the  affections 
of  the  Canadians  were  with  us  against  trusting  too  confidently  on  such  a 
calculation,  the  basis  of  which  was  treason.     He  concluded,  therefore,  that 
a  portion  of  the  invading  army  would  be  distributed  in  the  upper  country, 
after  its  conquest,  among  the  places  susceptible  of  military  strength  and 
defense.     The  army,  considerably  reduced,  sets  itself  down  before  Quebec. 
Suppose  it  falls.     Here   again  will  be  required  a  number  of  men  to  hold 
and  defend  it.     And  if  the  war  be  prosecuted  still  further,  and  the  lower 
country  and  Halifax  be  assailed,  he  conceived  it  obvious,  that  the  whole 
force  of  twenty-five  thousand  men  would  not  be  too  great. 

The  difference  between  those  who  were  for  fifteen  thousand,  and  those 
who  were  for  twenty-five  thousand  men,  appeared  to  him  to  resolve  itself 
into  the  question,  merely,  of  a  short  or  protracted  war ;  a  war  of  vigor,  or 
a  war  of  languor  and  imbecility.  If  a  competent  force  be  raised  in  the 
first  instance,  the  war  on  the  continent  will  be  speedily  terminated.  He 
was  aware  that  it  might  still  rage  on  the  ocean.  But  where  the  nation 
could  act  with  unquestionable  success,  he  was  in  favor  of  the  display  of  an 
energy  correspondent,  to  the  feelings  and  spirit  of  the  country.  Suppose 
one  third  of  the  force  he  had  mentioned  (twenty-five  thousand  men)  could 


ON    THE   INCREASE   OF   MILITARY   FORCE.  37 

reduce  the  country,  say  in  three  years,  and  that  the  whole  could  accom- 
plish the  same  object  in  one  year ;  taking  into  view  the  great  hazard  of  the 
repulsion  and  defeat  of  the  small  force,  and  every  other  consideration,  do 
not  wisdom  and  true  economy  equally  decide  in  favor  of  the  larger  force, 
and  thus  prevent  failure  in  consequence  of  inadequate  means  ?  He  begged 
gentlemen  to  recollect  the  immense  extent  of  the  United  States ;  our  vast 
maritime  frontier,  vulnerable  in  almost  all  its  parts  to  predatory  incursions, 
and  he  was  persuaded  they  would  see  that  a  regular  force  of  twenty- 
five  thousand  men  was  not  much  too  great  during  a  period  of  war,  if  all 
designs  of  invading  the  provinces  of  the  enemy  were  abandoned. 

Mr.  Clay  proceeded  next  to  examine  the  nature  of  the  force  contem- 
plated by  the  bill.     It  was  a  regular  army,  enlisted  for  a  limited  time, 
raised  for  the  sole  purpose  of  war,  and  to  be  disbanded  on  the  return  of 
peace.     Against  this  army  all  our  republican  jealousies  and  apprehensions 
-are  attempted  to  be  excited.     He  was  not  the  advocate  of  standing  armies ; 
but  the  standing  armies  which  excite  most  his  fears,  are  those  which  are 
kept  up  in  time  of  peace.     He  confessed,  he  did  not  perceive  any  real 
source  of  clanger  in  a  military  force  of  twenty-five  thousand  men  in  the 
United  States,  provided  only  for  a  state  of  war,  even  supposing  it  to  be 
corrupted,  and  its  arms  turned,  by  the  ambition  of  its  leaders,  against  the 
freedom  of  the  country.     He  saw  abundant  security  against  the  success  of 
any    such   treasonable    attempt.     The   diffusion    of  political  information 
among   the  great  body  of  the   people  constituted  a  powerful  safeguard. 
The  American  character  has  been  much  abused  by  the  Europeans,  whose 
tourists,  whether  on  hor^e  on  foot,  in  verse  and  prose,  have  united  in  de- 
preciating it.     It  is  true  that  we  do  not  exhibit  as  many  signal  instances 
of  scientific  acquirement  in  this  country  as  are  furnished  in  the  old  world ; 
but  he  believed  it  undeniable,  that  the  great  mass  of  the  people  possessed 
more  intelligence  than  any  other  people  on  the  globe.     Such  a  people,  con- 
sisting of  upward  of  seven  millions,  affording  a  physical  power  of  about  a 
million  of  men  capable   of  bearing  arms,  and  ardently  devoted  to  liberty, 
could  not  be  subdued  by  an  army  of  twenty-five  thousand  men.     The  wide 
extent  of  country  over  which  we  are  spread  was  another  security.    In  other 
countries,  France  and  England  for  example,  the  fall  of  Paris  or  London  is 
the  fall  of  the  nation.     Here  are  no  such  dangerous  aggregations  of  peo- 
ple.    New  York,  and  Philadelphia,  and  Boston,  and  every  city  on  the 
Atlantic  might  be  subdued  by  a  usurper,  and  he  would  have  made  but  a 
small  advance  in  the  accomplishment  of  his  purpose.     He  would  add  a 
still  more  improbable  supposition,  that  the  country  east  of  the  Allegany, 
was  to  submit  to  the  ambition  of  some  daring  chief,  and  he  insisted  that  the 
liberty  of  the  Union  would  be  still  unconquered.     It  would  find  success- 
ful support  from  the  West,     We  are   not  only  in  the  situation  just  de- 
scribed, but  a  great  portion  of  the  militia — nearly  the  whole,  he  understood, 
of  that  of  Massachusetts — have  arms  in  their  hands;  and  he  trusted  in 
God  that  that  great  object  would  be  persevered  in,  until  every  man  in  the 


« 


38  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

nation  could  proudly  shoulder  the  musket  which  was  to  defend  his  coun- 
try and  himself.  A  people  having,  besides  the  benefit  of  one  general  gov- 
ernment, other  local  governments  in  full  operation,  capable  of  exerting  and 
commanding  great  portions  of  the  physical  power,  all  of  which  must  be 
prostrated  before  our  Constitution  is  subverted.  Such  a  people  have  noth- 
ing to   fear  from    a   petty  contemptible   force   of  twenty-five   thousand 

regulars. 

Mr.  Clay  proceeded,  more  particularly,  to  inquire  into  the  object  of  the 
force.     That  object  he  understood  distinctly  to  be  war,  and  war  with  Great 
Britain.     It  had  been  supposed,  by  some  gentlemen,  improper  to  discuss 
publicly  so  delicate  a  question.     He  did  not  feel  the  impropriety.     It  was 
a  subject  in  its  nature  incapable  of  concealment.     Even  in  countries  where 
the  powers  of  government  were  conducted  by  a  single  ruler,  it  was  almost  im- 
posible  for  that  ruler  to  conceal  his  intentions  when  he  meditated  war.    The 
assembling  of  armies,  the  streuthenings  of  posts  ;  all  the  movements  prepar- 
atory to  war,  and  which  it  is  impossible  to  disguise,  unfolded  the  inten- 
tions of  the  sovereign.     Does  Russia  or  France  intend  war,  the  intention  is 
almost  invariably  known  before  the  war  is  commenced.     If  Congress  were 
to  pass  a  law,  with  closed  doors,  for  raising  an  army  for  the  purpose  of 
war,  its  enlistment  and  organization,  which  could  not  be  done  in  secret, 
would  indicate  the  use  to  which  it  was  to  be  applied ;  and  we  can  not  sup- 
pose England  would  be  so  blind  as  not  to  see  that  she   was  aimed  at. 
Nor  could  she,  did  she  apprehend,  injure  us  more  by  thus  knowing  our 
purposes,  than  if  she  were  kept  in  ignorance  of  them.     She  may,  indeed, 
anticipate  us,  and  commence  the  war.     But  that  is  what  she  is  in  fact  do- 
ing, and  she  can  add  but  little  to  the  injury  which  she  is  inflicting.     If  she 
choose  to  declare  war  in  form,  let  her  do  so,  the  responsibility  will  be  with  her. 
What  are  we  to  gain  by  war  ?  has  been  emphatically  asked.     In  reply, 
he  would  ask,  what  are  we  not  to  lose   by  peace  ?     Commerce,  character, 
a  nation's  best  treasure,  honor !     If  pecuniary  considerations  alone  are  to 
govern,  there  is  sufficient  motive  for  the  war.     Our  revenue  is  reduced,  by 
the  operation  of  the  belligerent  edicts,  to  about  six  millions  of  dollars,  ac- 
cording to  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury's  report.     The  year  preceding  the 
embargo  it  was  sixteen.     Take  away  the  orders  in  council,  it  will  again 
mount  up  to  sixteen  millions.      By  continuing,  therefore,  in  peace  (if  the 
mono-rel  state  in  which  we  are  deserve  that  denomination),  we  lose  annually 
in  revenue  alone  ten  millions  of  dollars.     Gentlemen  will  say,  repeal  the 
law  of  non-importation.     He  contended,  that,  if  the  United  States  were 
capable  of  that  perfidy,  the  revenue  would  not  be  restored  to  its  former  state, 
the  orders  in  council  continuing.     Without  an  export  trade,  winch  those 
orders  prevent,  inevitable  ruin  would  ensue,  if  we  imported  as  freely  as 
we  did  prior  to  the  embargo.     A  nation  that  carries  on  an  import  trade, 
without  an  export  trade  to  support  it,  must,  in  the  end,  be  as  certainly  bank- 
rupt, as  the  individual,  would  be,  who  incurred  an  annual  expenditure  with- 
out au  income. 


ON    THE   INCREASE    OF    MILITARY    FORCE.  39 

He  had  no  disposition  to  magnify  or  dwell  upon  the  catalogue  of 
injuries  we  had  received  from  England.  He  could  not,  however,  overlook 
the  impressment  of  our  seamen — an  aggression  upon  which  he  never  re- 
flected without  feelings  of  indignation,  which  would  not  allow  him  appro- 
priate language  to  describe  its  enormity.  Not  content  with  seizing  upon 
all  our  property  which  falls  within  her  rapacious  grasp,  the  personal  rights 
of  our  countrymen — rights  which  forever  ought  to  be  sacred — are  trampled 
upon  and  violated.  The  orders  in  council  were  pretended  to  have  been 
reluctantly  adopted,  as  a  measure  of  retaliation.  The  French  decrees,  their 
alleged  basis,  are  revoked.  England  resorts  to  the  expedient  of  denying 
the  fact  of  the  revocation,  and  Sir  William  Scott,  in  the  celebrated  case  of 
Fox  and  others,  suspends  judgment  that  proof  may  be  adduced  to  it.  At 
the  same  moment,  when  the  British  ministry,  through  that  judge,  is  thus 
affecting  to  controvert  that  fact,  and  to  place  the  release  of  our  property 
upon  its  establishment,  instructions  are  prepared  for  Mr.  Foster,  to  meet  at 
Washington  the  very  revocation  which  they  were  contesting.  And  how 
does  he  meet  it  ?  By  fulfilling  the  engagement  solemnly  made  to  rescind 
the  orders  ?  No,  sir  ;  but  demanding  that  we  shall  secure  the  introduc- 
tion, into  the  continent,  of  British  manufactures ! 

Eno-land  is  said  to  be  fi^litins:  for  the  world,  and  shall  we,  it  is  asked, 
attempt  to  weaken  her  exertions?  If,  indeed,  the  aim  of  the  French 
emperor  be  universal  dominion  (and  he  wras  willing  to  allow  it  to  the  argu- 
ment), how  much  nobler  a  cause  is  presented  to  British  valor !  But  how 
is  her  philanthropic  purpose  to  be  achieved  ?  By  a  scrupulous  observance 
of  the  rights  of  others,  by  respecting  that  code  of  public  law  which  she 
professes  to  vindicate,  and  by  abstaining  from  self-aggrandizement.  Then 
•would  she  command  the  sympathies  of  the  world.  What  are  we  required 
to  do  by  those  who  would  engage  our  feelings  and  wishes  in  her  behalf  ? 
To  bear  the  actual  cuffs  of  her  arrogance,  that  we  may  escape  a  chimerical 
French  subjugation  !  We  are  invited,  conjured  to  drink  the  potion  of 
British  poison,  actually  presented  to  our  lips,  that  we  may  avoid  the 
imperial  dose  prepared  by  perturbed  imaginations.  We  are  called  upon 
to  submit  to  debasement,  dishonor,  and  disgrace ;  to  bow  the  neck  to 
roval  insolence,  as  a  course  of  preparation  for  manly  resistance  to  Gallic 
invasion  !  What  nation,  what  individual,  was  ever  taught,  in  the  schools 
of  ignominious  submission,  these  patriotic  lessons  of  freedom  and  inde- 
pendence ?  Let  those  who  contend  for  this  humiliating  doctrine,  read  its 
refutation  in  the  history  of  the  very  man  against  whose  insatiable  thirst  of 
.dominion  we  are  warned.  The  experience  of  desolated  Spain  for  the  last 
fifteen  years,  is  worth  volumes.  Did  she  find  her  repose  and  safety  in  sub- 
serviency to  the  will  of  that  man  ?  Had  she  boldly  stood  forth  and  re- 
repelled  the  first  attempt  to  dictate  to  her  councils,  her  monarch  would 
not  be  now  a  miserable  captive  in  Marseilles.  Let  us  come  home  to  our 
own  history ;  it  was  not  by  submission  that  our  fathers  achieved  our  inde- 
pendence.    The  patriotic  wisdom  that  placed  you,  Mr.  Chairman,  under 


40  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

that  canopy,  penetrated  the  designs  of  a  corrupt  ministry,  and  nobly 
fronted  encroachment  on  its  first  appearance.  It  saw,  beyond  the  petty 
taxes  with  which  it  commenced,  a  long  train  of  oppressive  measures,  ter- 
minating in  the  total  annihilation  of  liberty,  and,  contemptible  as  they 
were,  it  did  not  hesitate  to  resist  them.  Take  the  experience  of  the  last 
four  or  five  years,  which  he  was  sorry  to  say  exhibited,  in  appearance,  at 
least,  a  different  kiud  of  spirit.  He  did  not  wish  to  view  the  past,  further 
than  to  guide  us  for  the  future.  We  were  but  yesterday  contending  for 
the  indirect  trade ;  the  right  to  export  to  Europe  the  coffee  and  sugar  of 
the  West  ladies.  To-day  we  are  asserting  our  claim  to  the  direct  trade; 
the  right  to  export  our  cotton,  tobacco,  and  other  domestic  produce,  to 
market.  Yield  this  point,  and  to-morrow  intercourse  between  New  York 
and  New  Orleans,  between  the  planters  on  James  river  and  Richmond, 
will  be  interdicted.  For,  sir,  the  career  of  encroachment  is  never  arrested 
by  submission.  It  will  advance  while  there  remains  a  single  privilege  on 
which  it  can  operate.  Gentlemen  say  that  this  government  is  unfit  for 
any  war  but  a  war  of  invasion.  What,  is  it  not  equivalent  to  iuvasion,  if 
the  mouths  of  our  harbors  and  outlets  are  blocked  up,  and  we  are  denied 
egress  from  our  own  waters  ?  Or,  when  the  burglar  is  at  our  door,  shall 
we  bravely  sally  forth  and  repel  his  felonious  entrance,  or  meanly  skulk 
within  the  cells  of  the  castle  ? 

He  contended,  that  the  real  cause  of  British  aggression  was,  not  to  dis- 
tress an  enemy,  but  to  destroy  a  rival.  A  comparative  view  of  our  com- 
merce with  that  of  England  and  the  continent,  would  satisfy  any  one  of 
the  truth  of  this  remark.  Prior  to  the  embargo,  the  balance  of  trade 
between  this  country  and  England  was  between  eleven  and  fifteen  mil- 
lions of  dollars  in  favor  of  England.  Our  consumption  of  her  manufactures 
was  annually  increasing,  and  had  risen  to  nearly  fifty  millions  of  dollars. 
We  exported  to  her  what  she  most  wanted,  provisions  and  raw  materials 
for  her  manufactures,  and  received  in  return  what  she  was  most  desirous 
to  sell.  Our  exports  to  France,  Holland,  Spain,  and  Italy,  taking  an  ave- 
rage of  the  years  1802,  1803,  and  1804,  amounted  to  about  twelve  million 
dollars  of  domestic,  and  about  eighteen  million  dollars  of  foreign  produce. 
Our  imports  from  the  same  countries  amounted  to  about  twenty-five  mil- 
lion dollars.  The  foreign  produce  exported,  consisted  chiefly  of  luxuries, 
from  the  West  Indies.  It  is  apparent  that  this  trade,  the  balance  of  which 
was  in  favor,  not  of  France,  but  of  the  United  States,  was  not  of  very  vital 
consequence  to  the  enemy  of  England.  Would  she,  therefore,  for  the 
sole  purpose  of  depriving  her  adversary  of  this  commerce,  relinquish  her 
valuable  trade  with  this  country,  exhibiting  the  essential  balance  in  her 
favor;  nay,  more,  hazard  the  peace  of  the  country?  No,  sir;  you  must 
look  for  an  explanation  of  her  conduct  in  the  jealousies  of  a  rival.  She 
sickens  at  your  prosperity,  and  beholds,  in  your  growth— your  sails  spread 
on  every  ocean,  and  your  numerous  seamen — the  foundations  of  a  power 
which,  at  no  very  distant  day,  is  to  make  her  tremble  for  her  naval  supe- 


ON   THE    INCREASE    OF    MILITARY    FORCE.  41 

riority.  He  had  omitted  before  to  notice  the  loss  of  our  seamen,  if  wo 
continued  in  our  present  situation.  What  would  become  of  the  one  hun- 
dred thousand  (for  he  understood  there  was  about  that  number)  in  the 
American  service  ?  Would  they  not  leave  us  and  seek  employment  abroad, 
perhaps  in  the  very  country  that  injures  us  ? 

It  is  said,  that  the  effect  of  the  war  at  home,  will  be  a  change  of  those 
who  administer  the  government,  who  will  be  replaced  by  others  that  will 
make  a  disgraceful  peace.  He  did  not  believe  it.  Not  a  man  in  the  na- 
tion could  really  doubt  the  sincerity  with  which  those  in  power  have 
sought,  by  all  honorable  aud  pacific  means,  to  protect  the  interests  of  the 
country.  When  the  people  saw  exercised  toward  both  belligerents  the 
utmost  impartiality  ;  wituessed  the  same  equal  terms  tendered  to  both  ;  and 
beheld  the  government  successively  embracing  an  accommodation  with 
each,  in  exactly  the  same  spirit  of  amity,  he  was  fully  persuaded,  now  that 
war  was  the  only  alternative  left  to  us,  by  the  injustice  of  one  of  the 
powers,  that  the  support  and  confidence  of  the  people  would  remain  un- 
diminished. He  was  one,  however,  who  was  prepared  (and  he  would  not 
believe  that  he  was  more  so  than  any  other  member  of  the  committee)  to 
march  on  in  the  road  of  his  duty,  at  all  hazards.  What !  shall  it  be  said, 
that  our  amor  patrice  is  located  at  these  desks ;  that  we  pusillanimously 
cling  to  our  seats  here,  rather  than  boldly  vindicate  the  most  inestimable 
rights  of  the  countiy  ?  While  the  heroic  Daviess,  and  his  gallant  asso- 
ciates, exposed  to  all  the  dangers  of  treacherous  savage  warfare,  are  sacri- 
ficing themselves  for  the  good  of  their  country,  shall  we  shrink  from  our 
duty? 

He  concluded,  by  hoping  that  his  remarks  had  tended  to  prove  that  the 
quantum  of  the  force  required  was  not  too  great,  that  in  its  nature  it  was 
free  from  the  objections  urged  against  it,  aud  that  the  object  of  its  appli- 
cation was  one  imperiously  called  for  by  the  present  peculiar  crisis. 


ON  THE  INCREASE  OF  THE  NAVY. 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES,  JANUARY  22,  1812. 

[Mr.  Jefferson's  gun-boat  system  was  a  fair  subject  of  ridi- 
cule, and  it  was  laughed  out  of  existence.  Nevertheless,  this 
species  of  economy  ran  on  for  many  years,  and  our  navy  was  at  a 
low  ebb  at  the  accession  of  Mr.  Madison  to  the  presidential 
chair.  The  United  States  were  about  to  engage  in  war  with  a 
nation  that  floated  the  most  formidable  navy  in  the  world,  with- 
out any  marine  craft  that  would  dare  to  leave  our  harbors  and 
look  the  enemy  in  the  face.  The  whole  line  of  our  seaboard, 
and  our  cities  planted  here  and  there  upon  it,  would  be  exposed 
to  the  descent  of  British  naval  armaments.  And  yet,  a  proposal 
to  build  ten  frigates  was  resisted  by  those  in  Congress  who  still 
adhered  to  the  Jcffersonian  policy.  Mr.  Clay,  who  a  month  pre- 
viously had  so  eloquently  advocated  the  augmentation  of  the 
military  force,  and  carried  the  measure,  was  now  called  upon  to 
deliver  one  of  his  broadsides  in  behalf  of  the  navy.  Ten  frigates 
to  be  put  upon  the  stocks  at  once,  and  launched  and  armed  with 
the  greatest  possible  expedition,  was  an  unheard-of  bound  of 
public  policy.  It  was  a  daring  and  startling  measure,  and  no 
man  but  Mr.  Clay  could  overcome  the  difficulties  which  it  had 
to  encounter.  We  are  not  to  judge  of  these  difficulties  by  the 
facility  of  voting  appropriations  for  the  navy,  since  the  navy  has 
become  the  pride  of  the  nation,  and  that,  too,  in  consequence  of 
the  brilliant  achievements  of  those  very  ships  which  were  built 
in  1812.  Mr.  Clay  saw,  by  his  intuitive  perceptions,  what  was 
necessary  ;  but  it  was  no  easy  task  to  make  Congress  see  as  he 
saw  it.  It  was  necessary  that  he  should  so  transfer  his  own 
views  to  the  mind  of  that  body,  that  they  should  produce  con- 
viction there,  and  be  immediately  carried  into  action.  Such  was 
the  task,  and  such  the  triumphant  result.  The  frigates  were 
built,  and  the  history  of  the  war  of  1812  will  show  what  they 
achieved.  From  that  time  the  navy  became  and  has  remained, 
without  any  abatenient,  but  with  a  constant  'increase  of  affection, 


ON    THE   INCREASE    OF    THE    NAVY.  43 

the  pet  arm  of  the  public  service.  No  nation  in  the  world  is  so 
well  served  by  an  equal  number  of  ships  of  the  same  class  ;  and 
such  is  the  fame  of  our  navy,  that  no  nation  would  dare  to  en- 
counter it,  with  an  equal  force,  ship  for  ship,  and  of  the  same 

rate. 

If  we  look  for  the  causes  of  effects,  we  may,  perhaps,  find,  in 
the  following  speech,  the  cause  of  this  glory  of  our  navy.  True, 
Mr.  Clay  had  his  coadjutors  ;  but  the  dominant  party  then  in 
Congress,  were  dead  against  this  project  when  it  was  first  pro- 
posed. They  were  startled  by  it  as  extravagant.  But  Mr.  Clay 
was  the  recognized  leader  of  that  party,  and  they  did  not  dare 
to  vote  against  him.  Probably  they  followed  their  own  personal 
convictions,  after  they  had  heard  him.  This  speech,  therefore, 
may  be  regarded  as  occupying  a  momentously  important  place 
in  the  history  of  the  country,  and  it  should  be  read  with  pro- 
found interest  on  that  account.] 

Mr.  Clay  (in  Committee  of  the  Whole),  rose  to  present  his  views  on 
the  bill  before  the  committee.  He  said,  as  he  did  not  precisely  agree  in 
opinion  with  any  gentleman  who  had  spoken,  he  should  take  the  liberty 
of  detaining  the  committee  a  few  moments,  while  he  offered  to  their  at- 
tention some  observations.  He  was  highly  gratified  with  the  temper  and 
ability  with  which  the  discussion  had  hitherto  been  conducted.  It  was 
honorable  to  the  House,  and,  he  trusted,  would  continue  to  be  manifested 
on  many  future  occasions. 

On  this  interesting  topic  a  diversity  of  ojjinion  has  existed  almost  ever 
since  the  adoption  of  the  present  government.  On  the  one  hand,  there 
appeared  to  him  to  have  been  attempts  made  to  precipitate  the  nation  into 
all  the  evils  of  naval  extravagance,  which  had  been  productive  of  so  much 
mischief  in  other  countries  ;  and,  on  the  other,  strongly  feeling  this  mis- 
chief, there  has  existed  an  unreasonable  prejudice  against  providing  such 
a  competent  naval  protection,  for  our  commercial  and  maritime  rights,  as 
is  demanded  by  their  importance,  and  as  the  increased  resources  of  the 
country  amply  justify. 

The  attention  of  Congress  has  been  invited  to  this  subject  by  the 
president,  in  his  message  delivered  at  the  opening  of  the  session.  Indeed, 
had  it  been  wholly  neglected  by  the  chief  magistrate,  from  the  critical 
situation  of  the  country,  and  the  nature  of  the  rights  proposed  to  be  vin- 
dicated, it  must  have  pressed  itself  upon  our  attention.  But,  said  Mr. 
Clay,  the  president,  in  his  message,  observes:  "your  attention  will,  of 
course,  be  drawn  to  such  provisions  on  the  subject  of  our  naval  force  as 
may  be  required  for  the  service  to  which  it  is  best  adapted.  I  submit  to 
Congress  the  seasonableness  also  of  an  authority  to  augment  the  stock  of 
such  materials  as  are  imperishable  in  their  nature,  or  may  not  at  once  be 


44  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

attainable."  The  president,  by  this  recommendation,  clearly  intimates  an 
opinion  that  the  naval  force  of  this  country  is  capable  of  producing  effect; 
and  the  propriety  of  laying  up  imperishable  materials  was,  no  doubt,  sug- 
gested for  the  purpose  of  making  additions  to  the  navy  as  convenience  and 
exigences  might  direct. 

It  appeared  to  Mr.  Clay  a  little  extraordinary  that  so  much,  as  it  seemed 
to  him,  unreasonable  jealousy  should  exist  against  the  naval  establishment. 
If,  said  he,  we  look  back  to  the  period  of  the  formation  of  the  Constitution, 
it  will  be  found  that  no  such  jealousy  was  then  excited.  In  placing  the 
physical  force  of  the  nation  at  the  disposal  of  Congress,  the  Convention 
manifested  much  greater  apprehension  of  abuse  in  the  power  given  to  raise 
armies  than  in  that  to  provide  a  navy.  In  reference  to  the  navy  Congress 
is  put  under  no  restrictions;  but  with  respect  to  the  army,  that  description 
of  force  which  has  been  so  often  employed  to  subvert  the  liberties  of  man- 
kind, they  are  subjected  to  limitations  designed  to  prevent  the  abuse  of 
this  dangerous  power.  But  it  was  not  his  intention  to  detain  the  com- 
mit ice  by  a  discussion  on  the  comparative  utility  and  safety  of  these  two 
kinds  i  f  force.  He  would,  however,  be  indulged  in  saying  that  he  thought 
gentlemen  had  wholly  failed  in  maintaining  the  position  they  had  assumed, 
that  the  fail  of  maritime  powers  was  attributable  to  their  navies.  They 
have  told  you,  indeed,  that  Carthage,  Genoa,  Venice,  and  other  nations 
had  navies,  and,  notwithstanding,  were  finally  destroyed.  But  have  they 
shown,  by  a  train  of  argument,  that  their  overthrow  was,  in  any  degree,  at- 
tributable to  their  maritime  greatness?  Have  they  attempted  even  to 
show  that  there  exists  in  the  nature  of  this  power  a  necessary  tendency  to 
destroy  the  nation  using  it  1  Assertion  is  substituted  for  argument ;  in- 
ferences not  authorized  by  historical  facts  are  arbitrarily  drawn  ;  things 
wholly  unconnected  with  each  other  ai*e  associated  together ;  a  very  log- 
ical mole  of  reasoning  it  must  be  admitted  !  In  the  same  way  he  could 
demonstrate  how  idle  and  absurd  our  attachments  are  to  freedom  itself. 
He  might  say,  for  example,  that  Greece  and  Rome  had  forms  of  free  gov- 
ernment, and  that  they  no  longer  exist ;  and,  deducing  their  fall  from  their 
devotion  to  liberty,  the  conclusion  in  favor  of  despotism  would  very  satis- 
factory follow!  He  demanded  what  there  is  in  the  nature  and  con- 
struction of  maritime  power  to  excite  the  fears  that  have  been  indulged? 
Do  gentlemen  really  apprehend  that  a  body  of  seamen  will  abandon  their 
proper  element,  and,  placing  themselves  under  an  aspiring  chief,  will  erect 
a  throne  to  his  ambition  ?  Will  they  deign  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  his- 
tory, and  learn  how  chimerical  are  their  apprehensions? 

But  the  source  of  alarm  is  in  ourselves.  Gentlemen  fear  that  if  we 
provide  a  marine  it  will  produce  collisro;is  with  foreign  nations;  plunge  us 
into  war,  and  ultimately  overturn  the  Constitution  of  the  country.  Sir,  if 
you  wish  to  avoid  foreign  collision  you  had  better  abandon  the  ocean 
surrender  all  your  commerce ;  give  up  all  your  prosperity.  It  is  the  thing 
protected,  not   the   instrument   of  protection   that  involves  you  in  war. 


ON    THE    INCREASE    OF    THE    NAVY.  45 

Commerce  engenders  collision,  collision  war,  and  war,  the  argument,  sup- 
poses, leads  to  despotism.  Would  the  counsels  of  that  statesman  be 
deemed  wise  who  would  recommend  that  the  nation  should  be  unarmed ; 
that  the  art  of  war,  the  martial  spirit,  and  martial  exercises  should  be  ] pro- 
hibited ;  who  should  declare  in  the  language  of  Othello,  that  the  nation 
must  bid  farewell  to  the  neighing  steed,  and  the  shrill  trump,  the  spirit- 
stirring  drum,  the  ear-piercing  fife,  and  all  the  pride,  pomp,  and  circum- 
stance of  glorious  war ;  and  that  the  great  body  of  the  people  should  be 
taught  that  national  happiness  was  to  be  found  in  perpetual  peace  alone  ? 
No,  sir.  Aud  yet  every  argument  in  favor  of  a  power  of  protection  on 
land  applies,  in  some  degree,  to  a  power  of  protection  on  the  sea.  Un- 
doubtedly a  commerce  void  of  naval  protection  is  more  exposed  to  rapac- 
ity than  a  guarded  commerce ;  and  if  we  wish  to  invite  the  continuance 
of  the  old,  or  the  enactment  of  the  new  edicts,  let  us  refrain  from  all  ex- 
ertion upon  that  element  where  they  must  operate,  and  where,  in  the  end, 
they  must  be  resisted. 

For  his  part  (Mr.  Clay  said)  he  did  not  allow  himself  to  be  alarmed 
by  those  apprehensions  of  maritime  power  which  appeared  to  agitate 
other  gentlemen.  In  the  nature  of  our  government  he  beheld  abundant 
security  against  abuse.  He  would  be  unwilling  to  tax  the  land  to  support 
the  rights  of  the  sea,  and  was  for  drawing  from  the  sea  itself  the  resources 
with  which  its  violated  freedom  should,  at  all  times,  be  vindicated. 
While  this  principle  is  adhered  to  there  will  be  no  danger  of  running  into 
the  folly  and  extravagance  which  so  much  alarms  gentlemen ;  and  when- 
ever it  is  abandoned — whenever  Congress  shall  lay  burdensome  taxes  to 
augment  the  navy  beyond  what  may  be  authorized  by  the  increased 
wealth,  and  demanded  by  the  exigences  of  the  country,  the  people  will  in- 
terpose, and,  removing  their  unworthy  representatives,  apply  the  appro- 
priate corrective.  Mr.  Clay,  then,  could  not  see  any  just  ground  of  dread 
in  the  nature  of  naval  power.  It  was,  on  the  contrary,  free  from  the  evils 
attendant  upon  standing  armies.  And  the  genius  of  our  institutions— 
the  great  representative  principle,  in  the  practical  enjoyment  of  which  we 
are  so  eminently  distinguished — afforded  the  best  guaranty  against  the 
ambition  and  wasteful  extravagance  of  government.  What  maritime 
strength  is  it  expedient  to  provide  for  the  United  States  ?  In  considering 
this  subject  three  different  degrees  of  naval  power  present  themselves. 
In  the  first  place,  such  a  force  as  would  be  capable  of  contending  with 
that  which  any  other  nation  is  able  to  bring  on  the  ocean — a  force  that, 
boldly  scouring  every  sea,  would  challenge  to  combat  the  fleets  of  other 
powers,  however  great.  He  admitted  that  it  was  impossible  at  this  time, 
perhaps  it  never  would  be  desirable,  for  this  country  to  establish  so  ex- 
tensive a  navy.  Indeed,  he  should  consider  it  as  madness  in  the  extreme 
in  this  government  to  attempt  to  provide  a  navy  able  to  cope  with  the 
fleets  of  Great  Britain,  wherever  they  might  be  met. 

The  next  species  of  naval  power  to  which  he  would  advert,  is  that  which. 


46  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

without  adventuring  into  distant  seas,  and  keeping  generally  in  our  own 
harbors,  and  on  our  coasts,  would  be  competent  to  beat  oft'  any  squadron 
which  might  be  attempted  to  be  permanently  stationed  in  our  waters.  His 
friends  from  South  Carolina  (Messrs.  Cheves  and  Lowndes)  had  satisfac- 
torily shown,  that,  to  effect  this  object,  a  force  equivalent  only  to  one  third 
of  that  which  the  maintenance  of  such  a  squadron  must  require,  would  be 
sufficient ;  that  if,  for  example,  England  should  determine  to  station  per- 
manently upon  our  coast  a  squadron  of  twelve  ships  of  the  fine,  it  would 
require  for  this  service  thirty-six  ships  of  the  line  ;  one  third  in  port,  re- 
pairing, one  third  on  the  passage,  and  one  third  on  the  station.  But  that 
is  a  force  which  it  has  been  shown  that  even  England,  with  her  boasted 
navy,  could  not  spare  for  the  American  service,  while  she  is  engaged  in 
the  present  contest.  Mr.  Clay  said  that  he  was  desirous  of  seeing  such  a 
force  as  he  had  described  ;  that  is,  twelve  ships  of  the  line  and  fifteen  or 
twenty  frigates,  provided  for  the  United  States  ;  but  he  admitted  that  it 
was  unattainable  in  the  present  situation  of  the  finances  of  the  country. 
He  contended,  however,  that  it  was  such  as  Congress  ought  to  set  about 
providing ;  and  he  hoped,  in  less  than  ten  years,  to  see  it  actually  estab- 
lished. He  was  far  from  surveying  the  vast  maritime  power  of  Great 
Britain  with  the  desponding  eye  with  which  other  gentlemen  beheld  it. 
He  could  not  allow  himself  to  be  discouraged  at  a  prospect  of  even  her 
thousand  ships.  This  country  only  required  resolution,  and  a  proper  ex- 
ertion of  its  immense  resources,  to  command  respect,  and  to  vindicate 
every  essential  right.  When  we  consider  our  remoteness  from  Europe,  the 
expense,  difficulty,  and  perils,  to  which  any  squadron  would  be  exposed, 
while  stationed  off  our  coasts,  he  entertained  no  doubt  that  the  force  to 
which  he  referred,  would  insure  the  command  of  our  own  seas.  Such  a 
force  would  avail  itself  of  our  extensive  sea-board  and  numerous  harbors, 
everywhere  affording  asylums  to  which  it  could  safely  retire  from  a  su- 
perior fleet,  or  from  which  it  could  issue,  for  the  purpose  of  annoyance. 
To  the  opinion  of  his  colleague  (Mr.  McKee)  who  appeared  to  think  that 
it  was  in  vain  for  us  to  make  any  struggle  on  the  ocean,  he  would  oppose 
the  sentiments  of  his  distinguished  connection,  the  heroic  Daviess,  who 
fell  in  the  battle  of  Tippecanoe. 

The  third  description  of  force,  worthy  of  consideration,  is,  that  which 
would  be  able  to  prevent  any  single  vessel,  of  whatever  metal,  from  en- 
dangering our  whole  coasting  trade,  blocking  up  our  harbors,  and  laying 
under  contribution  our  cities — a  force  competent  to  punish  the  insolence 
of  the  commander  of  any  single  ship,  and  to  preserve  in  our  own  jurisdic- 
tion the  inviolability  of  our  peace  and  our  laws.  A  force  of  this  kind  is 
entirely  within  the  compass  of  our  means,  at  this  time.  Is  there  a  reflect- 
ing man  in  the  nation,  who  would  not  charge  Congress  with  a  culpable 
neglect  of  its  duty,  if,  for  the  want  of  such  a  force,  a  single  ship  were  to 
bombard  one  of  our  cities  ?  Would  not  every  honorable  member  of  the 
committee  inflict  on  himself  the  bitterest  reproaches,  if,  by  failing  to  make 


ON  THE  INCREASE  OF  THE  NAVY.  47 

an  inconsiderable  addition  to  our  little  gallant,  navy,  a  single  British  vessel 
should  place  New  York  under  contribution  ?  Yes,  sir,  when  the  city  is  in 
flames,  its  wretched  inhabitants  begin  to  repent  of  their  neglect,  in  not 
providing  engines  and  water-buckets.  If,  said  Mr.  Clay,  we  are  not  able 
to  meet  the  wolves  of  the  forest,  shall  we  put  up  with  the  barking  impu- 
dence of  every  petty  cur  that  trips  across  our  way  ?  Because  we  can  not 
guard  against  every  possible  danger,  shall  we  provide  against  none  ?  He 
hoped  not.  He  had  hardly  expected  that  the  instructing  but  humiliating 
lesson  was  so  soon  to  be  forgotten,  which  was  taught  us  in  the  murder  of 
Pierce,  the  attack  on  the  Chesapeake,  and  the  insult  offered  in  the  very 
harbor  of  Charleston,  which  the  brave  old  fellow  who  commanded  the  fort 
in  vain  endeavored  to  chastise.  It  was  a  rule  with  Mr.  Clay,  when  acting 
either  in  a  public  or  private  character,  to  attempt  nothing  more  than  what 
there  existed  a  prospect  of  accomplishing.  He  was  therefore  not  in  favor 
of  entering  into  any  mad  projects  on  this  subject,  but  for  deliberately  and 
resolutely  pursuing  what  he  believed  to  be  within  the  power  of  govern- 
ment. Gentlemen  refer  to  the  period  of  1798,  and  we  are  reminded  of 
the  principles  maintained  by  the  opposition  at  that  time.  He  had  no 
doubt  of  the  correctness  of  that  opposition.  The  naval  schemes  of  that 
day  were  premature,  not  warranted  by  the  resources  of  the  country,  and 
were  contemplated  for  an  unnecessary  war,  into  which  the  nation  was 
about  to  be  plunged.  He  always  admired  and  approved  the  zeal  and 
ability  with  which  that  opposition  was  conducted,  by  the  distinguished 
gentleman  now  at  the  head  of  the  treasury.  But  the  state  of  things  is 
totally  altered.  What  was  folly  in  1798,  may  be  wisdom  now.  At  that 
time,  we  had  a  revenue  only  of  about  six  millions.  Our  revenue  now, 
upon  a  supposition  that  commerce  is  restored,  is  about  sixteen  millions. 
The  population  of  the  country,  too,  is  greatly  increased,  nearly  doubled, 
and  the  wealth  of  the  nation  is  perhaps  tripled.  "While  our  ability  to 
construct  a  navy  is  thus  enhanced,  the  necessary  maritime  protection  is 
proportionably  augmented.  Independent  of  the  extension  of  our  com- 
merce, since  the  year  1798,  we  have  had  an  addition  of  more  than  five 
hundred  miles  to  our  coast,  from  the  bay  of  Perdido  to  the  mouth 
of  the  Sabiue — a  weak  and  defenseless  accession,  requiring,  more  than  any 
other  part  of  our  maritime  frontier,  the  protecting  arm  of  government. 

The  groundless  imputation,  that  those  who  were  friendly  to  a  navy, 
were  espousing  a  principle  inimical  to  freedom,  should  not  terrify  him. 
He  was  not  ashamed  when  in  such  company  as  the  illustrious  author  of 
the  Notes  on  Virginia,  whose  opinion  on  the  subject  of  a  navy,  contained 
in  that  work,  contributed  to  the  formation  of  his  own.  But  the  principle 
of  a  navy,  Mr.  Clay  contended,  was  no  longer  open  to  controversy.  It 
was  decided  when  Mr.  Jefferson  came  into  power.  With  all  the  prejudices 
against  a  navy,  which  are  alleged  by  some  to  have  been  then  brought  into 
the  administration,  with  many  honest  prejudices,  he  admitted,  the  rash 
attempt  was  not  made  to  destroy  the  establishment.     It  was  reduced  to 


48  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

only  Avhat  was  supposed  to  be  within  the  financial  capacity  of  the  country. 
If,  ten  years  ago,  when  all  those  prejudices  were  to  be  combatted,  even  in 
time  of  peace,  it  was  deemed  proper,  by  the  then  administration,  to  retain 
in  service  ten  frigates,  he  put  it  to  the  candor  of  gentlemen  to  say,  if  now, 
when  we  are  on  the  eve  of  a  war,  and  taking  into  view  the  actual  growth 
of  the  country,  and  the  acquisition  of  our  coast  on  the  Gulf  of  Mexico, 
we  ought  not  to  add  to  the  establishment. 

Mr.  Clay  said,  he  had  hitherto  alluded  more  particularly  to  the  exposed 
situation  of  certain  parts  of  the  Atlantic  frontier.  While  he  felt  the  deep- 
est solicitude  for  the  safety  of  New  York,  and  other  cities  on  the  coast, 
he  would  be  pardoned  by  the  committee,  for  referring  to  the  interests  of 
that  section  of  the  Union  from  which  he  came.  If,  said  he,  there  be  a 
point  more  than  any  other  in  the  United  States,  demanding  the  aid  of 
naval  protection,  that  point  is  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi.  What  is  the 
population  of  the  western  country,  dependent  on  this  single  outlet  for  its 
surplus  productions?  Kentucky,  according  to  the  last  enumeration,  has 
four  hundred  and  six  thousand  five  hundred  and  eleven  ;  Tennessee,  two 
hundred  and  sixty-one  thousand  seven  hundred  and  twenty-seven  ;  and 
Ohio,  two  hundred  and  thirty  thousand  seven  hundred  and  sixty.  And 
when  the  population  of  the  western  parts  of  Virginia,  and  Pennsylvania, 
and  the  territories  which  are  drained  by  the  Mississippi  or  its  waters,  is 
added,  it  will  form  an  aggregate  equal  to  about  one  fifth  of  the  whole  pop- 
ulation of  the  United  States,  resting  all  their  commercial  hopes  upon 
this  solitary  vent.  The  bulky  articles  of  which  their  surplus  productions 
consist,  can  be  transported  in  no  other  way.  They  will  not  bear  the  ex- 
pense of  a  carriage  up  the  Ohio  and  Tennessee,  and  across  the  mountains, 
and  the  circuitous  voyage  of  the  lakes  is  out  of  the  question.  While 
most  other  States  have  the  option  of  numerous  outlets,  so  that,  if  one  be 
closed,  resort  can  be  had  to  others,  this  vast  population  has  no  alternative. 
Close  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  and  their  export  trade  is  annihilated. 
He  called  the  attention  of  his  western  friends,  especially  his  worthy 
Kentucky  friends  (from  whom  he  felt  himself,  with  regret,  constrained  to 
differ  on  this  occasion),  to  the  state  of  the  public  feeling  in  that  quarter, 
while  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  was  withheld  by  Spain;  and  to  the 
still  more  recent  period,  when  the  right  of  dep6t  was  violated.  The  whole 
country  was  in  commotion,  and,  at  the  nod  of  government,  would  have 
fallen  on  Baton  Rouge  and  New  Orleans,  and  punished  the  treachery  of  a 
perfidious  government.  Abandon  all  idea  of  protecting,  by  maritime  force, 
the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  and  we  shall  have  the  recurrence  of  many 
similar  scenes.  We  shall  hold  the  inestimable  right  of  the  navigation  of 
that  river,  by  the  most  precarious  tenure.  The  whole  commerce  of  the 
Mississippi — a  commerce  that  is  destined  to  be  the  richest  that  was  ever 
borne  by  a  single  stream — is  placed  at  the  mercy  of  a  single  ship,  lying 
off  the  Balize !  Again  ;  the  convulsions  of  the  new  world,  still  more,  per- 
haps, than  those  of  Europe,  challenge  our  attention.     Whether  the  ancient 


ON  THE  INCREASE  OF  THE  NAVY.  49 

dynasty  of  Spain  is  still  to  be  upheld  or  subverted,  is  extremely  uncertain, 
if  the  bonds  connecting  the  parent-country  with  her  colonies,  are  not  for 
ever  broken.  What  is  to  become  of  Cuba  ?  Will  it  assert  independence, 
or  remain  the  province  of  some  European  power  ?  In  either  case,  the 
whole  trade  of  the  western  country,  which  must  pass  almost  within  gun- 
shot of  the  Moro  Castle,  is  exposed  to  danger.  It  was  not,  however,  of 
Cuba  he  was  afraid.  He  wished  her  independent.  But  suppose  England 
gets  possession  of  that  valuable  island.  With  Cuba  on  the  south,  and 
Halifax  on  the  north — and  the  consequent  means  of  favoring  or  annoying 
commerce,  of  particular  sections  of  the  country — he  asked,  if  the  most 
sanguine  among  us  would  not  tremble  for  the  integrity  of  the  Union  ? 
If,  along  with  Cuba,  Great  Britain  should  acquire  East  Florida,  she  will 
have  the  absolute  command  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  Can  gentlemen,  par- 
ticularly gentlemen  from  the  western  country,  contemplate  such  possible, 
nay,  probable,  events,  without  desiring  to  see  at  least  the  commencement 
of  such  a  naval  establishment  as  would  effectually  protect  the  Mississippi  ? 
He  entreated  them  to  turn  their  attention  to  the  defenseless  situation  of  the 
Orleans  Territory,  and  to  the  nature  of  its  population.  It  is  known,  that, 
while  under  the  Spanish  government,  they  experienced  the  benefit  of  naval 
security.  Satisfy  them,  that,  under  the  government  of  the  United  States, 
they  will  enjoy  less  protection,  and  you  disclose  the  most  fatal  secret. 

The  general  government  receives  annually,  for  the  public  lands,  about 
six  hundred  thousand  dollars.  One  of  the  sources  whence  the  western 
people  raise  this  sum,  is  the  exportation  of  the  surplus  productions  of  that 
country.  Shut  up  the  Mississippi,  and  this  source  is,  in  a  great  measure, 
dried  up.  But  suppose  this  government  to  look  upon  the  occlusion  of  the 
Mississippi,  without  making  an  effort  on  that  element,  where  alone  it  could 
be  made  successfully,  to  remove  the  blockading  force,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
to  be  vigorously  pressing  payment  for  the  public  lands  ;  he  shuddered  at  the 
consequences.  Deep-rooted  as  he  knew  the  affections  of  the  western  peo- 
ple to  be  to  the  Union  (and  he  would  not  admit  their  patriotism  to  be  sur- 
passed by  any  other  quarter  of  the  country),  if  such  a  state  of  things  were 
to  last  any  considerable  time,  he  should  seriously  apprehend  a  withdrawal 
of  their  confidence.  Nor,  sir,  could  we  dreive  any  apology  for  the  failure 
to  afford  this  protection,  from  the  want  of  the  materials  for  naval  archi- 
tecture. On  the  contrary,  all  the  articles  entering  into  the  construction 
of  a  navy — iron,  hemp,  timber,  pitch — abound  in  the  greatest  quantities 
on  the  waters  of  the  Mississippi.  Kentucky  alone,  he  had  no  doubt, 
raised  hemp  enough  the  last  year  for  the  whole  consumption  of  the  United 
States. 

If,  as  he  conceived,  gentlemen  had  been  unsuccessful  in  showing  that 
the  downfall  of  maritime  nations  was  ascribable  to  their  navies,  they  have 
been  more  fortunate  in  showing,  by  the  instances  to  which  they  had  re- 
ferred, that,  without  a  marine,  no  foreign  commerce  could  exist  to  any  ex- 
tent.    It  is  the  appropriate,  the  natural  (if  the  term  may  be  allowed) 

4 


50  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY   CLAY. 

connection  of  foreign  commerce.  The  shepherd  and  his  faithful  dog  are 
not  more  necessary  to  guard  the  flocks  that  browse  and  gambol  on  the 
neighboring  mountain.  He  considered  the  prosperity  of  foreign  commerce 
indissolubly  allied  to  marine  power.  Neglect  to  provide  the  one  and  you 
must  abandon  the  other.  Suppose  the  expected  war  with  England  is  com- 
menced, you  enter  and  subjugate  Canada,  and  she  still  refuses  to  do  you 
justice ;  what  other  possible  mode  will  remain  to  operate  on  the  enemy, 
but  upon  that  element  where  alone  you  can  then  come  in  contact  with 
him  ?  And  if  you  do  not  prepare  to  protect  there  your  own  commerce, 
and  to  assail  his,  will  he  not  sweep  from  the  ocean  every  vessel  bearing 
your  flag,  and  destroy  even  the  coasting  trade  ?  But,  from  the  arguments 
of  gentlemen,  it  would  seem  to  be  questioned  if  foreign  commerce  is  worth 
the  kind  of  protection  insisted  upon.  What  is  this  foreign  commerce 
that  has  suddenly  become  so  inconsiderable  ?  It  has,  with  very  trifling  aid 
from  other  sources,  defrayed  the  expenses  of  government  ever  since  the 
adoption  of  the  present  Constitution ;  maintained  an  expensive  and  suc- 
cessful war  with  the  Indians ;  a  war  with  the  Barbary  powers ;  a  quasi 
war  with  France ;  sustained  the  charges  of  suppressing  two  insurrections, 
and  extinguishing  upward  of  forty-six  millions  of  the  public  debt.  In 
revenue  it  has,  since  the  year  1789,  yielded  one  hundred  and  ninety-one 
millions  of  dollars.  During  the  first  four  years  after  the  commencement 
of  the  present  government  the  revenue  averaged  only  about  two  millions 
annually  ;  during  a  subsequent  period  of  four  years  it  rose  to  an  average 
of  fifteen  millions,  annually,  or  became  equivalent  to  a  capital  of  two 
hundred  and  fifty  millions  of  dollars,  at  an  interest  of  six  per  centum 
per  annum.  And  if  our  commerce  is  re-established,  it  will,  in  the  course 
of  time,  net  a  sum  for  which  we  are  scarcely  furnished  with  figures  in 
arithmetic.  Taking  the  average  of  the  last  nine  years  (comprehending 
of  course  the  season  of  the  embargo),  our  exports  average  upward  of  thirty- 
seven  millions  of  dollars,  which  is  equivalent  to  a  capital  of  more  than  six 
hundred  millions  of  dollars,  at  six  per  centum  interest ;  all  of  which  must 
be  lost  in  the  event  of  a  destruction  of  foreign  commerce.  In  the  aban- 
donment of  that  commerce  is  also  involved  the  sacrifice  of  our  brave  tars, 
who  have  engaged  in  the  pursuit  from  which  they  derive  subsistence  and 
support,  under  the  confidence  that  government  would  afford  them  that  just 
protection  which  is  due  to  all.  They  will  be  driven  into  foreign  employ- 
ment, for  it  is  vain  to  expect  that  they  will  renounce  their  habits  of  life. 

The  spirit  of  commercial  enterprise,  so  strongly  depicted  by  the  gentle- 
man from  New  York  (Mr.  Mitchell)  is  diffused  throughout  the  country. 
It  is  a  passion  as  unconquerable  as  any  with  which  nature  has  endowed 
tis.  You  may  attempt,  indeed,  to  regulate,  but  you  can  not  destroy  it. 
It  exhibits  itself  as  well  on  the  waters  of  the  western  country  as  on  the 
waters  and  shores  of  the  Atlantic.  Mr.  Clay  had  heard  of  a  vessel,  built 
at  Pittsburg,  having  crossed  the  Atlantic  and  entered  a  European  port 
(he  believed  that  of  Leghorn).     The  master  of  the  vessel  laid  his  papers 


ON  THE   INCREASE   OF   THE  NAVY.  51 

before  the  proper  custom-house  officer,  which  of  course  stated  the  place  of 
her  departure.     The  officer  boldly  denied  the  existence  of  any  such  Amer- 
ican port  as  Pittsburg,  and  threatened  a  seizure  of  the  vessel  as  being 
furnished  with  forged  papers.     The  affrighted  master  procured  a  map  of 
the  United  States,  and,  pointing  out  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  took  the  officer  to 
the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  traced  the  course  of  the  Mississippi  more 
than  a  thousand  miles,  to  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio,  and  conducting  him  still 
a  thousand  miles  higher,  to  the  junction  of  the  Alleghany  and  Mononga- 
heia. — there,  he  exclaimed,  stands  Pittsburg,  the  port  from  which  I  sailed ! 
The  custom-house  officer,  prior  to  the  production  of  this  evidence,  would 
have  as  soon  believed  that  the  vessel  had  performed  a  voyage  from  the  moon. 
In  delivering  the  sentiments  he  had  expressed,  Mr.  Clay  considered  him- 
self as  conforming  to  a  sacred  constitutional  duty.     When  the  power  to 
provide  a  navy  was  confided  to  Congress,  it  must  have  been  the  intention 
of  the  Convention  to  submit  only  to  the  discretion  of  that  body  the  period 
when  that  power  should  be  exercised.     That  period  had,  in  his  opinion, 
arrived,  at  least  for  making  a  respectable  beginning.     And  while  he  thus 
discharo-ed  what  he  conceived  to  be  his  duty,  he  derived  great  pleasure 
from  the  reflection  that  he  was  supporting  a  measure  calculated  to  impart 
additional  strength  to  our  happy  Union.    Diversified  as  are  the  interests  of 
its  various  parts,  how  admirably  do  they  harmonize  and  blend  together ! 
We  have  only  to  make  a  proper  use  of  the  bounties  spread  before  us  to 
render  us  prosperous  and  powerful.     Such  a  navy  as  he  had  contended 
for,  will  form  a  new  bond  of  connection  between  the  States,  concentrating 
their  hopes,  their  interests,  and  their  affections. 


ON  THE  NEW  ARMY  BILL. 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES,  JANUARY  8,  1813. 

[The  war  has  commenced,  and  is  now  nearly  eight  months  in 
progress.  Our  little  navy,  even  against  immense  odds,  by  skill- 
ful maneuvering,  and  hard  fighting,  has  covered  itself  with  glory. 
But  with  few  exceptions,  enumerated  by  Mr.  Clay  in  the  follow- 
ing speech,  the  army  has  met  with  a  series  of  mortifying  dis- 
asters. Our  attempts  to  take  Canada  have  proved  a  failure. 
The  army  has  been  defeated  and  demoralized,  and  the  country 
overshadowed  with  gloom.  The  administration  is  assailed  Tvith 
reproach  by  the  opposition.  The  Hartford  Convention  has  been 
in  session,  and  disunion  is  threatened. 

Under  these  circumstances,  Congress  assembled  in  December, 
1812.  On  the  30th  of  August,  General  Harrison  wrote  to  Mr. 
Clay,  "  In  my  opinion,  your  presence  on  the  frontier  of  this  State 
(Ohio)  would'  be  productive  of  great  advantages.  I  can  assure 
you,  that  your  advice  and  assistance  in  determining  the  course 
of  operations  for  the  army  (to  the  command  of  which  I  have 
been  designated  by  your  recommendation)  will  be  highly  useful. 
You  are  not  only  pledged  in  some  manner  for  my  conduct,  but 
for  the  success  of  the  war.  For  God's  sake,  then,  come  on  to 
Piqua  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  let  us  endeavor  to  throw  off 
from  the  administration  that  weight  of  reproach  which  the  late 
disasters  will  heap  upon  them."  Mr.  Clay,  however,  could  not 
go,  his  presence  being  required  at  Washington.  This  call  of 
General  Harrison,  and  the  reasons  assigned  for  it,  would  seem  to 
justify  Mr.  Madison  in  the  offer  he  made  to  Mr.  Clay  at  this 
time,  to  give  him  the  command  of  the  army.  But  Mr.  Clay 
could  not  be  spared  from  his  leadership  in  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives. It  is  known,  that  Mr.  Clay  not  only  counseled  war 
before  it  commenced,  but  that  he  had  to  screw  up  the  courage 
of  Mr.  Madison  and  his  Cabinet,  while  they  hesitated.  He,  too, 
blew  the  same  trumpet  on  the  floor  of  Congress.  On  him,  there- 
fore, rested,  in  no  slight  degree,  the  responsibility  of  the  war. 


ON   THE   NEW  AKMY   BILL.  53 

After  the  disasters  on  the  frontier,  and  in  Canada,  there  was  no 
choice  left  but  an  increase  of  the  array  ;  and  soon  after  the 
meeting  of  Congress,  a  bill  was  brought  in  to  raise  twenty  ad- 
ditional regiments.  It  was  during  the  pending  of  this  bill  that 
the  following  speech  was  delivered  ;  and,  as  will  be  seen,  Mr. 
Clay's  chief  attention  was  directed  to  the  opponents  of  the  war, 
who  had  embraced  the  opportunity  of  these  misfortunes  to  fall 
upon  the  administration  with  the  utmost  virulence.  It  devolved 
on  Mr.  Clay  to  answer  them.  If  we  consider  the  position  of  the 
country,  and  the  position  of  Mr.  Clay  himself,  it  can  hardly  be 
denied  that  he  displayed  on  this  occasion  the  greatest  vigor  of 
his  character.  He  had  two  single  aims,  one  to  silence  the  oppo- 
sition, and  the  other  to  reanimate  the  country  for  a  vigorous 
prosecution  of  the  war  to  an  honorable  peace.  Canada  was  the 
vulnerable  point  of  the  enemy,  and  Canada  must  be  taken — 
though  it  never  was  taken.  With  the  exception  of  the  defense 
of  New  Orleans,  by  General  Jackson,  on  the  8th  of  January, 
1815,  our  naval  victories  on  the  lakes  and  on  the  ocean,  were  the 
most  brilliant  achievements  of  the  war.] 

Mr.  Clay  (in  Committee  of  the  Whole)  said  he  was  gratified  yesterday 
by  the  recommitment  of  this  bill  to  a  committee  of  the  whole  House,  from 
two  considerations :  one,  since  it  afforded  him  a  slight  relaxation  from  a 
most  fatiguing  situation ;  and  the  other,  because  it  furnished  him  with  an 
opportunity  of  presenting  to  the  committee  his  sentiments  upon  the  im- 
portant topics  which  had  been  mingled  in  the  debate.  He  regretted,  how- 
ever, that  the  necessity  under  which  the  chairman  had  been  placed,  of 
putting  the  question,  precluded  the  opportunity  he  had  wished  to  enjoy,  of 
rendering  more  acceptable  to  the  committee  any  thing  he  might  have  to 
offer  on  the  interesting  points  on  which  it  was  his  duty  to  touch.  Un- 
prepared, however,  as  he  was  to  speak  on  this  day,  of  which  he  was  the 
more  sensible  from  the  ill  state  of  his  health,  he  would  solicit  the  attention 
of  the  committee  for  a  few  moments. 

I  was  a  little  astonished,  I  confess,  said  Mr.  Clay,  when  I  found  this  bill 
permitted  to  pass  silently  through  the  Committee  of  the  Whole,  and  not 
selected  until  the  moment  when  the  question  was  to  be  put  for  its  third 
reading,  as  the  subject  on  which  gentlemen  in  the  opposition  chose  to  lay 
before  the  House  their  views  of  the  interesting  attitude  in  which  the  nation 
stands.  It  did  appear  to  me  that  the  loan  bill,  which  will  soon  come 
before  us,  would  have  afforded  a  much  more  proper  occasion,  it  being 
more  essential,  as  providing  the  ways  and  means  for  the  prosecution  of  the 
war.  But  the  gentlemen  had  the  right  of  selection,  and  having  exercised 
it,  no  matter  how  improperly,  I  am  gratified,  whatever  I  may  think  of  the 


54  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY   CLAY. 

character  of  some  part  of  the  debate,  at  the  latitude  in  which,  for  once, 
they  have  been  indulged.  I  claim  only,  in  return,  of  gentlemen  on  the 
other  side  of  the  House,  and  of  the  committee,  a  like  indulgence  in  ex- 
pressing my  sentiments  with  the  same  unrestrained  freedom.  Perhaps,  in 
the  course  of  the  remarks  which  I  feel  myself  called  upon  to  make,  gentlemen 
may  apprehend  that  they  assume  too  harsh  an  aspect ;  but  I  have  only  now 
to  say  that  I  shall  speak  of  parties,  measures,  and  things,  as  they  strike  my 
moral  sense,  protesting  against  the  imputation  of  any  intention  on  my  part 
to  wound  the  feelings  of  any  gentleman. 

Considering  the  situation  in  which  tins  country  is  now  placed — a  state 
of  actual  war  with  one  of  the  most  powerful  nations  on  the  earth — it  may 
not  be  useless  to  take  a  view  of  the  past,  and  of  the  various  parties  which 
have  at  different  times  appeared  in  this  country,  and  to  attend  to  the  man- 
ner by  which  we  have  been  driven  from  a  peaceful  posture  to  our  present 
warlike  attitude.     Such  an  inquiry  may  assist  in  guiding  us  to  that  result, 
an  honorable  peace,  which  must  be  the  sincere  desire  of  every  friend  to 
America.     The  course  of  that  opposition,  by  which  the  administration  of 
the  government  had  been  unremittingly  impeded  for  the  last  twelve  years, 
was  singular,  and,  I  believe,  unexampled  in  the  history  of  any  country. 
It  has  been  alike  the  duty  and  the  interest  of  the  administration  to  pre- 
serve peace.     It  was  their  duty,  because  it  is  necessary  to  the  growth  of 
an  infant  people,  to  their  genius,  and  to  their  habits.     It  was  their  interest, 
because  a  change  of  the  condition  of  the  nation  brings  along  with  it  a 
danger  of  the  loss  of  the  affections  of  the  people.     The  administration  has 
not  been  forgetful  of  these  solemn  obligations.     No  art  has  been   left  un- 
essayed,  no  experiment,  promising  a  favorable  result,  left  untried  to  main- 
tain the  peaceful  relations  of  the  country.     When,  some  six  or  seven  years 
ao-o,  the  affairs  of  the  nation  assumed  a  threatening  aspect,  a  partial  non- 
importation was  adopted.     As  they  grew  more  alarming,  an  embargo  was 
imposed.     It  would  have  accomplished  its  purpose,  but  it  was  sacrificed 
upon  the  altar  of  conciliation.     Vain  and  fruitless  attempt  to  propitiate  ! 
Then  came  along  non-intercourse  ;    and  a   general  non-importation  fol- 
lowed in  the  train.     In  the  mean  time,  any  indications  of  a  return  to  the 
public  law  and  the  path  of  justice,  on  the  part  of  either  belligerent,  are 
seized  upon  with  avidity  by  the  administration.     The  arrangement  with 
Mr.  Erskine  is  concluded.     It  is  first  applauded,  and   then  censured  by 
the  opposition.     No  matter  with  what  unfeigned  sincerity,  with  what  real 
effort,  the  administration   cultivates  peace,  the  opposition  insists  that  it 
alone  is  culpable  for  every  breach  that  is  made  between  the  two  countries. 
Because  the  president  thought  proper,  in  accepting  the  proffered  repara- 
tion for  the  attack  on  a  national   vessel,  to  intimate  that  it  would  have 
better  comported  with  the  justice   of  the  king  (and  who  does  not  think 
so  ?)  to  punish  the  offending  officer,  the  opposition,  entering  into  the  royal 
feelino-s,  sees,  in  that  imaginary  insult,  abundant  cause  for  rejecting  Mr. 
ErsMne's  arrangement.     On  another  occasion,  you  can  not  have  forgotten 


ON    THE    NEW    ARMY    BILL.  55 

the  hypocritical  ingenuity  which  they  displayed,  to  divest  Mr.  Jackson's 
correspondence  of  a  premeditated  insult  to  this  country.  If  gentlemen 
would  only  reserve  for  their  own  government,  half  the  sensibility  which  is 
indulged  for  that  of  Great  Britain,  they  would  find  much  less  to  condemn. 
Restriction  after  restriction  has  been  tried ;  negotiation  has  been  resorted 
to,  until  further  negotiation  would  have  been  disgraceful.  While  these 
peaceful  experiments  are  undergoing  a  trial,  what  is  the  conduct  of  the 
opposition  ?  They  are  the  champions  of  war — the  proud — the  spirited — 
the  sole  repository  of  the  nation's  honor — the  men  of  exclusive  vigor  and 
energy.  The  administration,  on  the  contrary,  is  weak,  feeble,  and  pusil- 
lanimous— "incapable  of  being  kicked  into  a  war."  The  maxim,  "not  a 
cent  for  tribute,  millions  for  defense,"  is  loudly  proclaimed.  Is  the  admin- 
istration for  negotiation  ?  The  opposition  is  tired,  sick,  disgusted  with 
negotiation.  They  want  to  draw  the  sword,  and  avenge  the  nation's 
wrongs.  When,  however,  foreign  nations,  perhaps  emboldened  by  the 
very  opposition  here  made,  refuse  to  listen  to  the  amicable  appeals,  which 
have  been  repeated  and  reiterated  by  the  administration,  to  their  justice 
and  to  their  interest — when,  in  fact,  war  with  one  of  them  has  become 
identified  with  our  independence  and  our  sovereignty,  and  to  abstain  from 
it  was  no  longer  possible,  behold  the  ojmosition  veering  round  and  be- 
coming the  friends  of  peace  and  commerce.  They  tell  you  of  the  calam- 
ities of  war,  its  tragical  events,  the  squandering  away  of  your  resources, 
the  waste  of  the  public  treasure,  and  the  spilling  of  innocent  blood. 
"  Gorgons,  hydras,  and  chimeras  dire."  They  tell  you  that  honor  is  an  il- 
illusion  !  Now,  we  see  them  exhibiting  the  terrific  forms  of  the  roaring 
king  of  the  forest.  Now  the  meekness  and  humility  of  the  lamb  !  They 
are  for  war  and  no  restrictions,  when  the  administration  is  for  peace.  They 
are  for  peace  and  restrictions,  when  the  administration  is  for  war.  You 
find  them,  sir,  tacking  with  every  gale,  displaying  the  colors  of  every  party, 
and  of  all  nations,  steady  only  in  one  unalterable  purpose — to  steer,  if 
possible,  into  the  haven  of  power. 

During  all  this  time,  the  parasites  of  opposition  do  not  fail,  by  cunning 
sarcasm,  or  sly  inuendo,  to  throw  out  the  idea  of  French  influence,  which 
is  known  to  be  false,  which  ought  to  be  met  in  one  manner  only,  and  that 
is  by  the  lie  direct.  The  administration  of  this  country  devoted  to  foreign 
influence !  The  administration  of  this  country  subservient  to  France ! 
Great  God  !  what  a  charge  !  how  is  it  so  influenced  ?  By  what  ligament, 
on  what  basis,  on  what  possible  foundation  does  it  rest?  Is  it  similarity 
of  language  ?  No !  we  speak  different  tongues,  we  speak  the  English  lan- 
guage. On  the  resemblance  of  our  laws?  No  !  the  sources  of  our  juris- 
prudence spring  from  another  and  a  different  country.  On  commercial 
intercourse  ?  No  !  we  have  comparatively  none  with  France.  Is  it  from 
the  correspondence  in  the  genius  of  the  two  governments  ?  No !  here 
alone  is  the  liberty  of  man  secure  from  the  inexorable  despotism  which 
everywhere  else  tramples  it  under  foot.     Where,  then,  is  the  ground  of 


56  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

such  an  influence  ?  But,  sir,  I  am  insulting  you  by  arguing  on  such  a 
subject.  Yet,  preposterous  and  ridiculous  as  the  insinuation  is,  it  is  prop- 
agated with  so  much  industry,  that  there  are  persons  found  foolish  and 
credulous  enough  to  believe  it.  You  will,  no  doubt,  think  it  incredible 
(but  I  have  nevertheless  been  told  it  as  a  fact)  that  an  honorable  member 
of  this  House,  now  in  my  eye,  recently  lost  his  election  by  the  circulation 
of  a  silly  stoiy  in  his  district  that  he  was  the  first  cousin  of  the  Emperor 
Napoleon.  The  proof  of  the  charge  rested  on  the  statement  of  facts, 
which  was  undoubtedly  true.  The  gentleman  in  question,  it  was  alleged, 
had  married  a  connection  of  the  lady  of  the  President  of  the  United 
States,  who  was  the  intimate  friend  of  Thomas  Jefferson,  late  President  of 
the  United  States,  who,  some  years  ago,  was  in  the  habit  of  wearing  red 
French  breeches.  Now,  taking  these  premises  as  established,  you,  Mr. 
Chairman,  are  too  good  a  logician  not  to  see  that  the  conclusion  neces- 
sarily follows. 

Throughout  the  period  he  had  been  speaking   of,  the  opposition  has 
been  distinguished,  amid  all  its   veerings  and  changes,  by  another  inflex- 
ible feature — the  application  to  Bonaparte  of  every  vile  and  opprobious 
epithet  our  language,  copious  as  it  is  in  terms  of  vituperation,  affords.    He 
has  been  compared  to  every  hideous  monster,  and  beast,  from  that  men- 
tioned in  the  Revelations,  down  to  the  most  insignificant  quadruped.     He 
has  been  called  the  scourge  of  mankind,  the  destroyer  of  Europe,  the  great 
robber,  the  infidel,  the  modern  Attila,  and  heaven  knows  by  what  other 
names.     Really,  gentlemen  remind  me  of  an  obscure  lady,  in  a  city  not 
very  far  off,  who  also  took  it   into  her  head,  in  conversation  with  an  ac- 
complished French  gentleman,  to  talk  of  the  affairs  of  Europe.     She,  too, 
spoke  of  the  destruction  of  the  balance  of  power ;  stormed  and  raged 
about  the  insatiable  ambition  of  the  emperor ;  called  him  the  curse  of  man- 
kind, the  destroyer  of  Europe.     The  Frenchman  listened  to  her  with  per- 
fect patience,  and  when  she  had  ceased,  said  to  her,  with  ineffable  polite- 
ness, "  Madame,  it  would  give  my  master,  the  emperor,  infinite  pain,  if  he 
knew  how  hardly  you  thought  of  him."     Sir,  gentlemen  appear  to  me  to 
forget,  that  they  stand  on  American  soil ;  that  they  are  not  in  the  British 
House  of  Commons,  but  in  the  chamber  of  the  House  of  Representatives 
of  the  United   States ;  that  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  affairs  of 
Europe,  the  partition  of  territory  and  sovereignty  there,  except  so  far  as 
these  things  affect  the  interests  of  our  own  country.     Gentlemen  transform 
themselves  into  the  Burkes,  Chathams,  and  Pitts,  of  another  country,  and 
forgetting,  from  honest  zeal,  the  interests  of  America,  engage  with  Eu- 
ropean sensibility  in  the  discussion  of  European  interests.     If  gentlemen 
ask  me  Avhether  I  do  not  view  with  regret  and  horror  the  concentration  of 
such  vast  power  in  the  hands  of  Bonaparte,  I  reply,  that  I  do.     I  regret  to 
see  the  Emperor  of  China  holding  such  immense  sway  over  the  fortunes 
of  millions  of  our  species.     I  regret  to  see  Great  Britain  possessing  so  un- 
controlled a  command  over  all  the  waters  of  our  globe.     If  I  had  the 


ON    THE    NEW   ARMY    BILL.  57 

ability  to  distribute  among  tbe  nations  of  Europe  tbeir  several  portions  of 
power  and  of  sovereignty,  I  would  say  that  Holland  should  be  resuscitated, 
and  given  tbe  weight  she  enjoyed  in  the  days  of  her  De  Witts.  I  would 
confine  France  within  her  natural  boundaries,  the  Alps,  Pyrenees,  and  the 
Rhine,  and  make  her  a  secondary  naval  power  only.  I  would  abridge  the 
British  maritime  power,  raise  Prussia  and  Austria  to  their  original  condi- 
tion, and  preserve  the  integrity  of  the  empire  of  Russia.  But  these  are 
speculations.  I  look  at  the  political  transactions  of  Europe,  with  the  single 
exception  of  their  possible  bearing  upon  us,  as  I  do  at  the  history  of  other 
countries,  or  other  times.  I  do  not  survey  them  with  half  the  interest  that 
I  do  the  movements  in  South  America.  Our  political  relation  with  them 
is  much  less  important  than  it  is  supposed  to  be.  I  have  no  fears  of  French 
or  English  sr.bj ligation.  If  we  are  united  we  are  too  powerful  for  the 
mightiest  nation  in  Europe,  or  all  Europe  combined.  If  we  are  separated 
and  torn  asunder,  we  shall  become  an  easy  prey  to  the  weakest  of  them.  In 
the  latter  cheadful  contingency,  our  country  will  not  he  worth  preserving. 

Next  to  the  notice  which  the  opposition  has  found  itself  called  upon  to 
bestow  upon  the  French  emperor,  a  distinguished  citizen  of  Virginia  for- 
merly President  of  the  United  States,  has  never  for  a  moment  failed  to 
receive  their  kindest  and  most  respectful  attention.  An  honorable  gentle- 
man from  Massachusetts  (Mr.  Quincy),  of  whom  I  am  sorry  to  say  it  be- 
comes necessary  for  me,  in  the  course  of  my  remarks,  to  take  some  notice, 
has  alluded  to  him  in  a  remarkable  manuer.  Neither  his  retirement  from 
public  office,  his  eminent  services,  nor  his  advanced  age,  can  exempt  this 
patriot  from  the  coarse  assaults  of  party  malevolence.  No,  sir,  in  1801, 
he  snatched  from  the  rude  hand  of  usurpation  the  violated  Constitution  of 
his  country,  and  that  is  his  crime.  lie  preserved  that  instrument  in  form, 
and  substance,  and  spirit,  a  precious  inheritance  for  generations  to  come, 
and  for  this  he  can  never  be  forgiven.  How  vain  and  impotent  is  party 
rage  directed  against  such  a  man  !  He  is  not  more  elevated  by  his  lofty 
residence  upon  the  summit  of  his  own  favorite  mountain,  than  he  is  lifted, 
by  the  serenity  of  his  mind  and  the  consciousness  of  a  well-spent  life,  above 
the  malignant  passions  and  bitter  feelings  of  the  d  ty.  No  !  his  own  be- 
loved Monticello  is  not  more  moved  by  the  storms  that  beat  against  its 
sides,  than  is  this  illustrious  man  by  the  bowlings  of  the  whole  British 
pack,  set  loose  from  the  Essex  kennel !  When  the  gentleman,  to  whom  I 
have  been  compelled  to  allude,  shall  have  mingled  his  dust  with  that  of  his 
abused  ancestors,  when  he  shall  have  been  consigned  to  oblivion,  or,  if  he 
lives  at  all,  shall  live  only  in  the  treasonable  annals  of  a  certain  junto,  the 
name  of  Jefferson  will  be  hailed  with  gratitude,  his  memory  honored  and 
cherished  as  the  second  founder  of  the  liberties  of  the  people,  and  the 
perio  1  of  his  administration  will  be  looked  back  to  as  one  of  the  happiest 
and  brightest  epochs  of  American  history — an  oasis  in  the  midst  of  a 
sandy  desert.  But  I  beg  the  gentleman's  pardon  ;  he  has,  indeed,  secured 
to  himself  a  more  imperishable  fame  than  I  had  supposed ;  I  think  it  was 


58  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

about  four  years  ago  that  he  submitted  to  the  House  of  Representatives  an 
initiative  proposition  for  an  impeachment  of  Mr.  Jefferson.  The  House 
condescended  to  consider  it.  The  gentleman  debated  it  with  his  usual 
temper,  moderation,  and  urbanity.  The  House  decided  upon  it  in  the  most 
solemn  manner,  and,  although  the  gentleman  had  some  how  obtained  a 
second,  the  final  vote  stood,  one  for,  and  one  hundred  and  seventeen 
against  the  proposition. 

In  one  respect  there  is  a  remarkable,  difference  between  the  administra- 
tion and  the  opposition :  it  is  in  a  sacred  regard  for  personal  liberty. 
When  out  of  power  my  political  friends  condemned  the  surrender  of 
Jonathan  Robhins ;  they  opposed  the  violation  of  the  freedom  of  the  press 
in  the  sedition  law  ;  they  opposed  the  more  insidious  attack  upon  the  free- 
dom of  the  person,  under  the  imposing  garb  of  an  alien  law.  The  party 
now  in  opposition,  then  in  power,  advocated  the  sacrifice  of  the  unhappy 
Robbins,  and  passed  those  two  laws.  True  to  our  principles,  we  are  now 
struggling  for  the  liberty  of  our  seamen  against  foreign  oppression.  True 
to  theirs,  they  oppose  a  war  undertaken  for  this  object.  They  have,  in- 
deed, lately  affected  a  tender  solicitude  for  the  liberties  of  the  people,  and 
talk  of  the  danger  of  standing  armies,  and  the  burden  of  the  taxes.  But 
it  must  be  evident  to  you,  Mr.  Chairman,  that  they  speak  in  a  foreign 
idiom.  Their  broo-ue  evinces  that  it  is  not  their  vernacular  tono-ue. 
What!  the  opposition  who,  in  1798  and  1799,  could  raise  a  useless  army 
to  fight  an  enemy  three  thousand  miles  distant  from  us,  alarmed  at  the  ex- 
istence of  one  raised  for  a  known  and  specified  object — the  attack  of  the 
adjoining  provinces  of  the  enemy!  What!  the  gentleman  from  Massachu- 
setts, who  assisted  by  his  vote  to  raise  the  army  of  twenty-five  thousand, 
alarmed  at  the  danger  of  our  liberties  from  this  very  army  ! 

But,  sir,  I  must  speak  of  another  subject  which  I  never  think  of  but 
with  feelings  of  the  deepest  awe.  The  gentleman  from  Massachusetts,  in 
imitation  of  some  of  his  predecessors  of  1799,  has  entertained  us  with  a 
picture  of  cabinet  plots,  presidential  plots,  and  all  sorts  of  plots,  which  have 
been  engendered  by  the  diseased  state  of  the  gentleman's  imagination.  I 
wish,  sir,  that  another  plot  of  a  much  more  serious  and  alarming  character 
— a  plot  that  aims  at  the  dismemberment  of  our  Union — had  only  the 
same  imaginary  existence.  But  no  man  who  has  paid  any  attention  to 
tin.'  tone  of  certain  prints,  and  to  transactions  in  a  particular  quarter  of  the 
Union,  for  several  years  past,  can  doubt  the  existence  of  such  a  plot.  It 
was  far,  very  far  from  my  intention  to  charge  the  opposition  with  such  a 
design.  No,  I  believe  them  generally  incapable  of  it.  But  I  can  not  say 
as  much  for  some,  who  have  been  unworthily  associated  with  them  in  the 
quarter  of  the  Union  to  which  I  have  referred.  The  gentleman  can  not 
have  forgotten  his  own  sentiments,  uttered  even  on  the  floor  of  this  House, 
"  peaceably  if  we  can,  forciuly  if  we  must,"  nearly  at  the  very  time 
Henry's  mission  to  Boston  was  undertaken.  The  flagitiousness  of  that 
embassy  had  been  attempted  to  be  concealed  by  directing  the  public  at- 


ON    THE    NEW   ARMY    BILL.  59 

tention  to  the  price  which,  the  gentleman  says,  was  given  for  the  dis- 
closure. As  if  any  price  could  change  the  atrociousness  of  the  attempt  on 
the  part  of  Great  Britain,  or  could  extenuate,  in  the  slightest  degree,  the 
offense  of  those  citizens  who  entertained  and  deliberated  upon  a  proposition 
so  infamous  and  unnatural !  There  was  a  most  remarkable  coincidence 
between  some  of  the  things  which  that  man  states,  and  certain  events  in  the 
quarter  alluded  to.  In  the  contingency  of  war  with  Great  Britain,  it  will 
be  recollected  that  the  neutrality  and  eventual  separation  of  that  section 
of  the  Union  was  to  be  brought  about.  How,  sir,  has  it  happened,  since 
the  declaration  of  war,  that  British  officers  in  Canada  have  asserted  to 
American  officers,  that  this  very  neutrality  would  take  place  ?  That  they 
have  so  asserted  can  be  established  beyond  controversy.  The  project  is 
not  brought  forward  openly  with  a  direct  avowal  of  the  intention.  No, 
the  stock  of  good  sense  and  patriotism  in  that  portion  of  the  country  is  too 
great  to  bo  undisguisedly  encountered.  It  is  assailed  from  the  masked 
batteries  of  friendship,  of  peace  and  commerce  on  the  one  side,  and  by  the 
groundless  imputation  of  opposite  propensities  on  the  other.  The  affec- 
tions of  the  people  there  are  gradually  to  be  undermined.  The  project  is 
suggested  or  withdrawn  ;  the  diabolical  dramatis  personal  in  this  criminal 
tragedy  make  their  appearance  or  exit  as  the  audience,  to  whom  they  ad- 
dress themselves,  applaud  or  condemn.  I  was  astonished,  sir,  in  leading 
lately  a  letter,  or  pretended  letter,  published  in  a  prominent  print  in  that 
quarter,  and  written,  not  in  the  fervor  of  party  zeal,  but  coolly  and  dispas- 
sionately, to  find  that  the  writer  affected  to  reason  about  a  separation,  and 
attempted  to  demonstrate  its  advantages  to  the  different  portions  of  tho 
Union,  deploring  the  existence  now  of  what  he  terms  prejudices  against  it, 
but  hoping  for  the  arrival  of  the  period  when  they  shall  be  eradicated. 
But,  sir,  I  will  quit  this  unpleasant  subject ;  I  will  turn  from  one  whom  no 
sense  of  decency  or  propriety  could  restrain  from  soiling  the  carpet  on 
which  he  treads,  to  gentlemen  who  .have  not  forgotten  what  is  due  to 
themselves,  to  the  place  in  which  we  are  assembled,  or  to  those  by  whom 
they  are  opposed.  The  gentleman  from  North  Carolina  (Mr.  Pearson), 
from  Connecticut  (Mr.  Pitkin),  and  from  New  York  (Mr.  Bleeker),  have, 
with  their  usual  decorum,  contended  that  the  war  would  not  have  been 
declared,  had  it  not  been  for  the  duplicity  of  France  in  withholding  an 
authentic  instrument  repealing  the  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan  ;  that,  upon 
che  exhibition  of  such  an  instrument  the  revocation  of  the  Orders  in 
Council  took  place ;  that  this  main  cause  of  the  war,  but  for  which  it 
would  not  have  been  declared,  being  removed,  the  administration  ought  to 
seek  for  the  restoration  of  peace ;  and  that  upon  its  sincerely  doing  so, 
terms  compatible  with  the  honor  and  interest  of  this  country  might  be  ob- 
tained. It  is  my  purpose,  said  Mr.  Clay,  to  examine,  first,  into  the  cir- 
cumstances under  which  the  war  was  declared ;  secondly,  into  the  causes 
of  continuing  it ;  and  lastly,  into  the  means  which  have  been  taken,  or 
ought  to  be  taken  to  procure  peace ;  but,  sir,  I  am  really  so  exhausted 


60  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY   CLAY. 

that,  little  as  I  am  in  the  habit  of  asking  of  the  House  an  indulgence  of 
this  kind,  I  feel  I  must  trespass  on  their  goodness. 

[Here  Mr.  Clay  sat  down.  Mr.  Newton  moved  that  the  committee  rise, 
report  progress,  and  ask  leave  to  sit  again,  which  was  done.  On  the  next 
day  he  proceeded.] 

I  am  sensible,  Mr.  Chairman,  that  some  part  of  the  debate,  to  which 
this  bill  has  given  rise,  has  been  attended  by  circumstances  much  to  be  re- 
gretted, not  usual  in  this  House,  and  of  which  it  is  to  be  hoped,  there  will 
be  no  repetition.  The  gentleman  from  Boston  had  so  absolved  himself 
from  every  rule  of  decorum  and  propriety,  had  so  outraged  all  decency, 
that  I  have  found  it  impossible  to  suppress  the  feelings  excited  on  the  oc- 
casion. His  colleague,  whom  I  have  the  honor  to  follow,  (Mr.  Wheaton), 
whatever  else  he  might  not  have  proved,  in  his  very  learned,  ingenious, 
and  original  exposition  of  the  powers  of  this  government — an  exposition  in 
which  he  has  sought,  where  nobody  before  him  has,  and  nobody  after  him 
will  look,  fur  a  grant  of  our  powers,  I  mean  the  preamble  to  the  Constitu- 
tion— has  clearly  shown,  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  who  heard  him,  that  the 
power  of  defensive  war  is  conferred.  I  claim  the  benefit  of  a  similar  prin 
ciple,  in  behalf  of  my  political  friends,  against  the  gentlemen  from  Boston. 
I  demand  only  the  exercise  of  the  right  of  repulsion.  No  one  is  more 
anxious  than  I  am  to  preserve  the  dignity  and  the  freedom  of  debate  ;  no 
member  is  more  responsible  for  its  abuse,  and,  if,  on  this  occasion,  its  just 
limits  have  been  violated,  let  him,  who  has  been  the  unprovoked  aggressor, 
appropriate  to  himself,  exclusively,  the  consequences. 

I  omitted  yesterday,  sir,  when  speaking  of  a  delicate  and  painful  sub- 
ject, to  notice  a  powerful  engine  which  the  conspirators  against  the  integ- 
rity of  the  Union  employ,  to  effect  their  nefarious  purpose :  I  mean 
southern  influence.  The  true  friend  to  his  country,  knowing  that  our 
Constitution  was  the  work  of  compromise,  in  which  interests  apparently 
conflicting  were  attempted  to  be  reconciled,  aims  to  extinguish  or  allay 
prejudices.  But  this  patriotic  exertion  does  not  suit  the  views  of  those 
who  are  urged  on  by  diabolical  ambition.  They  find  it  convenient,  to 
imagine  the  existence  of  certain  improper  influences,  and  to  propagate 
with  their  utmost  industry  a  belief  of  them.  Hence  the  idea  of  southern 
preponderance,  Virginia  influence,  the  yoking  of  the  respectable  yeomanry 
of  the  North  with  negro  slaves  to  the  car  of  southern  nabobs.  If  Virginia 
really  cherished  a  reprehensible  ambition,  an  aim  to  monopolize  the  chief 
magistracy  of  the  country,  how  was  such  a  purpose  to  be  accomplished  ? 
Virginia,  alone,  can  not  elect  a  president,  whose  elevation  depends  upon  a 
plurality  of  electoral  votes,  and  a  consequent  concurrence  of  many  States. 
Would  Vermont,  disinterested  Pennsylvania,  the  Carolinas,  independent 
Georgia,  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  Ohio,  Louisiana,  all  consent  to  become  the 
tools  of  inordinate  ambition  ?  But  the  present  incumbent  was  designated 
to  the  office  before  his  predecessor  had  retired.  How  ?  By  public  sen- 
timent— public  sentiment,  which  grew  out  of  his  known  virtues,  his  illustri- 


ON   THE   NEW   ARMY    BILL.  61 

ous  services,  and  his  distinguished  abilities.  Would  the  gentleman  crush 
this  public  sentiment  ?  Is  he  prepared  to  admit  that  he  would  arrest  the 
progress  of  opinion  ? 

The  war  was  declared,  because  Great  Britain  arrogated  to  herself  the 
pretension  of  regulating  our  foreign  trade,  under  the  delusive  name  of 
retaliatory  orders  in  council — a  pretension  by  which  she  undertook  to 
proclaim  to  American  enterprise,  "  thus  far  shalt  thou  go,  and  no  further" 
— orders  which  she  refused  to  revoke,  after  the  alleged  cause  of  their  enact- 
ment had  ceased;  because  she  persisted  in  the  practice  of  impressing 
American  seamen ;  because  she  had  instigated  the  Indians  to  commit  hos- 
tilities against  us ;  and  because  she  refused  indemnity  for  her  past  injuries 
upon  our  commerce.  I  throw  out  of  the  question  other  wrongs.  The 
war  in  fact  was  announced,  on  our  part,  to  meet  the  war  which  she  was 
waning  on  her  part.  So  undeniable  were  the  causes  of  the  war,  so  pow- 
erfully did  they  address  themselves  to  the  feeling  of  the  whole  American 
people,  that  when  the  bill  was  pending  before  this  House,  geutlemen  in  the 
opposition,  although  provoked  to  debate,  would  not,  or  could  not,  utter  one 
syllable  against  it.  It  is  true,  they  wrapped  themselves  up  in  sullen  silence, 
pretending  they  did  not  choose  to  debate  such  a  question  in  secret  session. 
While  speaking  of  the  proceedings  on  that  occasion,  I  beg  to  be  permitted 
to  advert  to  another  fact  which  transpired — an  important  fact,  material  for 
the  nation  to  know,  and  which  I  have  often  regretted  had  not  been  spread 
upon  our  journals. 

My  honorable  colleague  (Mr.  McKee)  moved,  in  Committee  of  the 
Whole,  to  comprehend  France  in  the  war ;  and  when  the  question  was 
taken  upon  the  proposition,  there  appeared  but  ten  votes  in  support  of  it, 
of  which,  seven  belonged  to  this  side  of  the  House,  and  three  only  to  the 
other !  It  is  said  that  we  were  inveigled  into  the  war  by  the  perfidy  of 
France  ;  and  that,  had  she  furnished  the  document  in  time,  which  was 
first  published  in  England,  in  May  last,  it  would  have  been  prevented.  I 
will  concede  to  gentlemen  every  thing  they  ask  about  the  injustice  of 
France  toward  this  country.  I  wish  to  God  that  our  ability  was  equal  to 
our  disposition,  to  make  her  feel  the  sense  that  we  entertain  of  that  in- 
justice. The  manner  of  the  publication  of  the  paper  in  question  was,  un- 
doubtedly, extremely  exceptionable.  But  I  maintain  that,  had  it  made  its 
appearance  earlier,  it  would  not  have  had  the  effect  supposed  ;  and  the 
proof  lies  in  the  unequivocal  declarations  of  the  British  government.  I 
will  trouble  you,  sir,  with  going  no  further  back  than  to  the  letters  of  the 
British  minister,  addressed  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  just  before  the  expira- 
tion of  his  diplomatic  function.  It  will  be  recollected  by  the  committee, 
that  he  exhibited  to  this  government  a  dispatch,  from  Lord  Castlereagh,  in 
which  the  principle  was  distinctly  avowed,  that,  to  produce  the  effect  of 
a  repeal  of  the  orders  in  council,  the  French  decrees  must  be  absolutely 
and  entirely  revoked  as  to  all  the  world,  and  not  as  to  America  alone.  A 
copy  of  that  dispatch  was   demanded  of  him,  and   he  very   awkwardly 


62  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY    CLAY. 

evaded  it.     But  on  the    10th  of  June,  after  the  bill  declaring  war  had 
actually  passed  this  House,  and  was  pending  before  the  Senate  (and  which, 
I  have  no  doubt,  was  known  to  him),  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Monroe,  he  says  : 
"  I  have  no  hesitation,  sir,  in   saying,  that  Great  Britain,  as  the  case  has 
hitherto  stood,  never  did,  and  never  could,  engage,  without  the  greatest 
injustice  to  herself  and  her   allies,  as  well  as  to   other  neutral   nations, 
to  repeal  her  orders  as  affecting  America   alone,  leaving  them  in  force 
against   other  states,    upon   condition   that  France  would  except,  singly 
and  specially,  America  from  the  operation  of  her  decrees."     On  the  14th 
of  the  same  month,  the  bill  still  pending  before  the  Senate,  he  repeats : 
"  I  will  now  say  that  I  feel  entirely  authorized  to  assure  you  that  if  you 
can,  at  any  time,  produce  a  full  and  unconditional  repeal   of  the  French 
decrees,  as  you  have  a  right  ro  demand  it,  in  your  character  of  a  neutral 
nation,  and  that  it  be  disengaged  from  any  question   concerning  our  mar- 
itime  rights,  we   shall   be  ready   to  meet  you  with   a  revocation  of  the 
orders  in  council.     Previously  to  your  producing  such  an  instrument,  which 
I  am  sorry  to  see  you  regard  as  unnecessary,  you  can  not  expect  of  us  to 
give  up  our  orders  in  council."     Thus,  sir,  you  see  that  the  British  govern- 
ment would  not  be  content  with  a  repeal  of  the  French  decrees,  as  to  us 
only.     But  the  French  paper  in  question  was  such  a  repeal.     It  could  not, 
therefore,  satisfy  the  British  government.     It  could  not,  therefore,  have  in- 
duced that  government,  had  it  been  earlier  promulgated,  to  repeal  the 
orders  in  council.     It  could  not,  therefore,  have  averted  the  war.     The 
withholding  of  it  did  not  occasion  the  war,  and  the  promulgation  of  it 
would  not  have  prevented  the  war.     But  gentlemen  have  contended  that, 
in  point  of  fact,  it  did  produce  a  repeal  of  the  orders  in  council.     This  I 
deny.     After  it  made  its  appearance  in  England,  it  was  declared  by  one 
of  the  British  ministry,  in  Parliament,  not  to  be  satisfactory.     And  all  the 
world  knows  that  the  repeal  of  the  orders  in  council  resulted  from  the  in- 
quiry, reluctantly  acceded  to  by  the  ministry,  into  the  effect  upon  their 
manufacturing  establishments,  of  our  non-importation  law,  or  to  the  war- 
like attitude  assumed  by  this  government,  or  to  both.     But  it  is  said,  that 
the  orders  in  council  are  withdrawn,  no  matter  from  what  cause ;  and  that 
having  been  the  sole  motive  for  declaring  the  war,  the  relations  of  peace 
ouo-ht  to  be  restored.     This  brings  me  to  the  examination  of  the  grounds 
for  continuing    the  present  hostilities   between   this   country  and  Great 
Britain. 

I  am  far  from  acknowledging  that,  had  the  orders  in  council  been  re- 
pealed, as  they  have  been,  before  the  war  was  declared,  the  declaration  of 
hostilities  would  of  course  have  been  prevented.  In  a  body  so  numerous 
as  this  is,  from  which  the  declaration  emanated,  it  is  impossible  to  say, 
with  any  degree  of  certainty,  what  would  have  been  the  effect  of  such  a 
repeal.  Each  member  must  answer  for  himself.  As  to  myself,  I  have  no 
hesitation  in  saying,  that  I  have  always  considered  the  impressment  of 
American  seamen  as  much  the  most  serious  aggression.     But,  sir,  how 


ON    THE    NEW    ARMY   BILL.  63 

have  those  orders  at  last  been  repealed  ?  Great  Britain,  it  is  true,  has 
intimated  a  willingness  to  suspend  their  practical  operation,  but  she  still 
arrogates  to  herself  the  right  to  revive  thern  upon  certain  contingencies, 
of  which  she  constitutes  herself  the  sole  judge.  She  waives  the  temporary 
use  of  the  rod,  but  she  suspends  it  in  terrorem  over  our  heads.  Supposing 
it  to  be  conceded  to,  gentlemen,  that  such  a  repeal  of  the  orders  in 
council  as  took  place  on  the  23d  of  June  last,  exceptionable  as  it  is,  being 
known  before  the  war  was  proclaimed,  would  have  prevented  it ;  does  it 
follow  that  it  ought  to  induce  us  to  lav  down  our  arms,  without  the  redress 
of  any  other  injury  of  which  we  complain  ? 

Does  it  follow,  in  all  cases,  that  what  would  in  the  first  instance  have 
prevented  would  also  terminate  the  war  ?  By  no  meaus.  It  requires  a 
strong  and  powerful  effort  in  a  nation,  prone  to  peace  as  this  is,  to  burst 
through  its  habits,  and  encounter  the  difficulties  and  privations  of  war. 
Such  a  nation  ought  but  seldom  to  embark  in  a  belligerent  contest ;  but 
when  it  does,  it  should  be  for  obvious  and  essential  rights  alone,  and  should 
firmly  resolve  to  extort,  at  all  hazards  their  recognition.  The  war  of  the 
Revolution  is  an  example  of  a  war  begun  for  one  object  and  prosecuted  for 
another.  It  was  waged,  in  its  commencement,  against  the  right  asserted 
by  the  parent  country  to  tax  the  colonies.  Then  no  one  thought  of  abso- 
lute independence.  The  idea  of  independence  was  repelled.  But  the 
British  government  would  have  relinquished  the  principle  of  taxation. 
The  founders  of  our  liberties  saw,  however,  that  there  was  no  security  short 
of  independence,  and  they  achieved  that  independence.  When  nations  are 
engaged  in  war,  those  rights  in  controversy,  which  are  not  acknowledged 
by  the  treaty  of  peace,  are  abandoned.  And  who  is  prepared  to  say,  that 
American  seamen  shall  be  surrendered  as  victims  to  the  English  principle 
of  impressment  ?  And,  sir,  what  is  this  principle  ?  She  contends,  that 
she  has  a  right  to  the  services  of  her  own  subjects  ;  and  that,  in  the  exer- 
cise of  this  right,  she  may  lawfully  impress  them,  even  although  she  finds 
them  in  American  vessels,  upon  the  high  seas,  without  her  jurisdiction. 
Now  I  deny  that  she  has  any  right,  beyond  her  jurisdiction,  to  come  on 
board  our  vessels,  upon  the  high  seas,  for  any  other  purpose  than  in  the 
pursuit  of  enemies,  or  their  goods,  or  goods  contraband  of  war.  But  she 
further  contends,  that  her  subjects  can  not  renounce  their  allegiance  to  her, 
and  contract  a  new  obligation  to  other  sovereigns.  I  do  not  mean  to  go 
into  the  general  question  of  the  right  of  expatriation.  If,  as  is  contended, 
all  nations  deny  it,  all  nations  at  the  same  time  admit  and  practice  the 
right  of  naturalization.  Great  Britain  herself  does  this.  Great  Britain,  in 
the  very  case  of  foreign  seamen,  imposes,  perhaps,  fewer  restraints  upon 
naturalization  than  any  other  nation.  Then,  if  subjects  can  not  break  their 
original  allegiance,  they  may,  according  to  universal  usage,  contract  a  new 
allegiance.  What  is  the  effect  of  this  double  obligation  ?  Undoubtedly, 
that  the  sovereign,  having  possession  of  the  subject,  would  have  the  right 
to  the  services  of  the  subject.     If  he  return  within  the  jurisdiction  of  his 


64  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

primitive  sovereign  lie  may  resume  Lis  right  to  his  services,  of  which  the 
subject,  by  his  own  act,  could  not  divest  himself.  But  his  primitive  sove- 
reign can  have  no  right  to  go  in  quest  of  him,  out  of  his  own  jurisdiction, 
into  the  jurisdiction  of  another  sovereign,  or  upon  the  high  seas,  where 
there  exists  either  no  jurisdiction,  or  it  is  possessed  by  the  nation  owning 
the  ship  navigating  them.  But,  sir,  this  discussion  is  altogether  useless. 
It  is  not  to  the  British  principle,  objectionable  as  it  is,  that  we  are  alone  to 
look ;  it  is  to  her  practice,  no  matter  what  guise  she  puts  on.  It  is  in 
vain  to  assert  the  inviolability  of  the  obligation  of  allegiance.  It  is  in 
vain  to  set  up  the  plea  of  necessity,  and  to  allege  that  she  can  not  exist, 
without  the  impressment  of  her  seamen.  The  naked  truth  is,  she  comes, 
by  her  press-gangs,  on  board  of  our  vessels,  seizes  ouk  native  as  well  as 
naturalized  seamen,  and  drags  them  into  her  service.  It  is  the  case,  then, 
of  the  assertion  of  an  erroneous  principle,  and  of  a  practice  not  conform- 
able to  the  asserted  principle — a  principle,  which,  if  it  were  theoretically 
right,  must  be  forever  practically  wrong — a  practice  which  can  obtain 
countenauce  from  no  principle  whatever,  and  to  submit  to  which,  on  our 
part,  would  betray  the  most  abject  degradation.  We  are  told,  by  gentle- 
men in  the  opposition,  that  government  has  not  done  all  that  was  incum- 
bent on  it  to  do,  to  avoid  just  cause  of  complaint  on  the  part  of  Great 
Britain  ;  that,  iu  particular,  the  certificates  of  protection,  authorized  by  the 
act  of  1796,  are  fraudulently  used.  Sir,  government  has  done  too  much 
in  granting  those  paper  protections.  I  can  never  think  of  them  without 
being  shocked.  They  resemble  the  passes  which  the  master  grants  to  his 
neoro  slave — "  Let  the  bearer,  Mungo,  pass  and  repass  without  molesta- 
tion." What  do  they  imply  ?  That  Great  Britain  has  a  right  to  seize  all 
who  are  not  provided  with  them.  From  their  very  nature,  they  must  be 
liable  to  abuse  on  both  sides.  If  Great  Britain  desires  a  mark,  by  which 
she  can  know  her  own  subjects,  let  her  give  them  an  ear  mark.  The  colors 
that  float  from  the  mast-head  should  be  the  credentials  of  our  seamen. 
There  is  no  safety  to  us,  and  the  gentlemen  have  shown  it,  but  in  the 
rule,  that  all  who  sail  under  the  flag  (not  being  enemies)  are  protected  by 
the  flag.  It  is  impossible,  that  this  country  should  ever  abandon  the  gal- 
lant tars  who  have  won  for  us  such  splendid  trophies.  Let  me  suppose 
that  the  genius  of  Columbia  should  visit  one  of  them  in  his  oppressor's 
prison,  and  attempt  to  reconcile  him  to  his  forlorn  and  wretched  condition. 
She  would  say  to  him,  in  the  language  of  gentlemen  on  the  other  side, 
"  Great  Britain  intends  you  no  harm ;  she  did  not  mean  to  impress  you, 
but  one  of  her  own  subjects;  having  taken  you  by  mistake,  I  will  remon- 
strate, and  try  to  prevail  upon  her,  by  peaceable  means,  to  release  you  ;  but 
I  can  not,  my  son,  fight  for  you."  If  he  did  not  consider  this  mere  mock- 
ery, the  poor  tar  would  address  her  judgment,  and  say,  "  You  owe  me,  my 
country,  protection ;  I  owe  you,  in  return,  obedience.  I  am  no  British 
subject,  I  am  a  native  of  old  Massachusetts,  where  lived  my  aged  lather, 
my  wife,  my  children.     I  have  faithfully  discharged  my  duty.     Will  you 


ON    THE    NEW   ARMY    BILL.  65 

refuse  to  do  yours  ?"  Appealing  to  her  passions,  he  would  continue  :  *;  I 
lost  this  eye  in  fighting  under  Truxton,  with  the  Insurgente ;  I  got  this 
scar  before  Tripoli ;  I  broke  this  leg  on  board  the  Constitution,  when  the 
Guerriere  struck."  If  she  remained  still  unmoved,  he  would  break  out,  in 
the  accents  of  mingled  distress  and  despair, 

' '  Hard,  hard  is  my  fate !  once  I  freedom  enjoyed, 
Was  as  happy  as  happy  could  be  1 
Oh  I  how  hard  is  my  fate,  how  galling  these  chains  !'* 

I  will  not  imagine  the  dreadful  catastrophe  to  which  he  would  be  driven 
by  an  abandonment  of  him  to  his  oppressor.  It  will  not  be,  it  can  not  be, 
that  his  country  will  refuse  him  protection. 

It  is  said  that  Great  Britain  has  been  always  willing  to  make  a  satis- 
factory arrangement  of  the  subject  of  impressment ;  and  that  Mr.  King 
had  nearly  concluded  one,  prior  to  his  departure  from  that  country.  Let 
us  hear  what  that  minister  says  upon  his  return  to  America.  In  this  letter, 
dated  at  New  York  in  July,  1803,  after  giving  an  account  of  his  attempt 
to  form  an  arrangement  for  the  protection  of  our  seamen,  and  his  inter- 
views to  this  end  with  Lords  Hawkesbury  and  St.  Vincent ;  and  stating 
that,  when  he  had  supposed  the  terms  of  a  convention  were  agreed  upon, 
a  new  pretension  was  set  up  (the  mare  clausum),  he  concludes  :  "  I  regret 
to  have  been  uuable  to  put  this  business  on  a  satisfactory  footing,  knowing, 
as  I  do,  its  very  great  importance  to  both  parties ;  but  I  flatter  myself  that 
I  have  not  misjudged  the  interests  of  our  own  country,  in  refusing  to  sanc- 
tion a  principle  that  might  be  productive  of  more  extensive  evils  than 
those  it  was  our  aim  to  prevent."  The  sequel  of  his  negotiation  on  this 
affair  is  more  fully  given  in  the  recent  conversation  between  Mr.  Russell 
and  Lord  Castlereagh,  communicated  to  Congress  during  its  present  ses- 
sion.   Lord  Castlereagh  says  to  Mr.  Russell : 

"Indeed,  there  has  evidently  been  much  misapprehension  on  this  sub- 
ject ;  an  erroneous  belief  entertained  that  an  arrangement,  in  regard  to  it, 
has  been  nearer  an  accomplishment  than  the  facts  will  waraant.  Even  our 
friends  in  Congress,  I  mean  those  who  are  opposed  to  going  to  war  with  us, 
have  been  so  confident  in  this  mistake,  that  they  have  ascribed  the  failure 
of  such  an  arrangement  solely  to  the  misconduct  of  the  American  govern- 
ment. This  error  probably  originated  with  Mr.  King ;  for,  being  much 
esteemed  here,  and  always  well  received  by  the  persons  in  power,  he  seems 
to  have  misconstrued  their  readiness  to  listen  to  his  representations,  and 
their  warm  professions  of  a  disposition  to  remove  the  complaints  of  Amer- 
ica, in  relation  to  impressment,  into  a  supposed  conviction,  on  their  part, 
of  the  propriety  of  adopting  the  plan  which  he  had  proposed.  But  Lord 
St.  Vincent,  whom  he  might  have  thought  he  had  brought  over  to  his 
opinions,  appears  never  for  a  moment  to  have  ceased  to  regard  all  arrange- 

*  The  effect  of  the  above  hypothetical  dialogue,  ending  with  these  lines,  is  said 
to  have  been  prodigious. — Editor. 

5 


66  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

ments  on  the  subject,  to  be  attended  with  formidable  if  not  insurmountable 
obstacles.  This  is  obvious,  from  a  letter  which  his  lordship  addressed 
to  Sir  AVilliam  Scott  at  the  time."  Here  Lord  Castlereagh  read  a  letter, 
contained  in  the  records  before  him,  in  which  Lord  St.  Vincent  states  to  Sir 
William  Scott  the  zeal  with  which  Mr.  King  had  assailed  him  on  this 
subject  of  impressment ;  confesses  his  own  perplexity,  and  total  incompe- 
tency to  discover  any  practical  project  for  the  safe  discontinuance  of  that 
practice,  and  asks  for  counsel  and  advice.  "  Thus  you  see,"  proceeded 
Lord  Castlereagh,  "  that  the  confidence  of  Mr.  King,  on  this  subject,  was 
entirely  unfounded." 

Thus  it  is  apparent,  that  at  no  time  has  the  enemy  been  willing  to  place 
this  subject  on  a  satisfactory  footing.  I  will  speak  hereafter  of  the  over- 
tures made  by  the  administration  since  the  war. 

The  honorable  gentleman  from  New  York  (Mr.  Bleeker),  in  the  very 
sensible  speech  with  which  he  favored  the  committee,  made  one  observa- 
tion which  did  not  comport  with  his  usual  liberal  and  enlarged  views.  It 
was,  that  those  who  are  most  interested  against  the  practice  of  impress- 
ment, did  not  desire  a  continuance  of  the  war  on  account  of  it;  while 
those  (the  southern  and  western  members)  who  had  no  interest  in  it,  were 
the  zealous  advocates  of  American  seamen.  It  was  a  provincial  sentiment 
unworthy  of  that  gentleman.  It  was  one  which,  in  a  change  of  con- 
dition, he  would  not  express,  because  I  know  he  could  not  feel  it.  Does 
not  that  gentleman  feel  for  the  unhappy  victims  of  the  tomahawk  in  the 
western  wilds,  although  his  quarter  of  the  Union  may  be  exempted  from 
similar  barbarities  ?  I  am  sure  he  does.  If  there  be  a  description  of 
rights  which,  more  than  any  other,  should  unite  all  parties  in  all  quarters 
of  the  Union,  it  is  unquestionably  the  rights  of  the  person.  No  matter 
what  his  vocation ;  whether  he  seeks  subsistence  amid  the  dangers  of  the 
deep,  or  draws  them  from  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  or  from  the  humblest 
occupations  of  mechanic  life ;  wherever  the  sacred  rights  of  an  American 
freeman  are  assailed,  all  hearts  ought  to  unite,  and  every  arm  should  be 
braced  to  vindicate  his  cause. 

The  gentleman  from  Delaware  sees  in  Canada  no  object  worthy  of  con- 
quest. According  to  him  it  is  a  cold,  sterile,  and  inhospitable  region. 
And  yet  such  are  the  allurements  which  it  offers,  that  the  same  gentleman 
apprehends  that  if  it  be  annexed  to  the  United  States,  already  too  much 
weakened  by  an  extension  of  territory,  the  people  of  New  England  will 
rush  over  the  line  and  depopulate  that  section  of  the  Union  !  That  gen- 
tleman considers  it  honest  to  hold  Canada  as  a  kind  of  hostage,  to  regard 
it  as  a  sort  of  bond  for  the  good  behavior  of  the  enemy.  But  he  will  not 
enforce  the  bond.  The  actual  conquest  of  that  country  would,  according 
to  him,  make  no  impression  upon  the  enemy ;  and  yet  the  very  apprehen- 
sion only  of  such  a  conquest  would,  at  all  times,  have  a  powerful  operation 
upon  him  !  Other  gentlemen  consider  the  invasion  of  that  country  as 
wicked  and  unjustifiable.     Its  inhabitants  are  represented  as  harmless  and 


ON   THE   NEW   AKMY   BILL.  67 

unoffending ;  as  connected  -with  those  of  the  bordering  States  by  a  thou- 
sand  tender  ties,  interchanging  acts  of  kindness,  and  all  the  offices  of  good 
neighborhood.     Canada,  said  Mr.  Clay,  innocent !     Canada  unoffending ! 
Is  it  not  in  Canada  that  the  tomahawk  of  the  savage  has  been  molded  into 
its  death-like  form  ?     Has  it  not  been  from  Canadian  magazines,  Maiden 
and  others,  that  those  supplies  have  been  issued  which  nourish  and  con- 
tinue  the   Indian   hostilities — supplies   which  have   enabled   the   savage 
hordes  to  butcher  the  garrison  of  Chicago,  and  to  commit  other  horrible 
excesses  and  murders  ?    Was  it  not  by  the  joint  co-operation  of  Canadians 
and  Indians  that  a  remote  American  fort,  Michilimackiuac,  was  assailed 
and  reduced  while  in  ignorance  of  a  state  of  war  ?     But,  sir,  how  soon 
have  the  opposition  changed  their  tone !     When  the  administration  was 
striving,  by  the  operation  of  peaceful  measures,  to  bring  Great  Britain 
back  to  a  sense  of  justice,  they  were  for  old-fashioned  war.    And  now  they 
have  got  old-fashioned  war  their  sensibilities  are  cruelly  shocked,  and  all 
their  sympathies  lavished  upon  the  harmless  inhabitants  of  the  adjoining 
provinces.     What  does  a  state  of  war  present  ?     The  united  energies  of 
one  people  arrayed  against  the  combined  energies  of  another ;  a  conflict 
in  which  each  party  aims  to  inflict  all  the  injury  it  can,  by  sea  and  land, 
upon  the  territories,  property,  and  citizens  of  an  other ;   subject  only  to 
the  rules  of  mitigated  war  practiced  by  civilized  nations.     The  gentlemen 
would  not  touch  the  continental  provinces  of  the  enemy,  nor,  I  presume, 
for  the  same  reason,  her  possessions  in  the  West  Indies.     The  same  hu- 
mane spirit  would  spare  the  seamen  and  soldiers  of  the  enemy.     The  sa- 
cred person  of  his  majesty  must  not  be  attacked ;  for  the  learned  gentlemen 
on  the  other  side  are  quite  familiar  with  the  maxim,  that  the  king  can  do 
no  wrong.     Indeed,  sir,  I  know  of  no  person  on  whom  we  may  make  war 
upon  the  principles  of  the  honorable  gentlemen  but  Mr.  Stephen,  the  cele- 
brated author  of  the  orders  in  council,  or  the  Board  of  Admiralty  who  au- 
thorize and  regulate  the  practice  of  impressment! 

The  disasters  of  the  war  admonish  us,  we  are  told,  of  the  necessity  of 
terminating  the  contest.  If  our  achievements  by  land  have  been  less 
splendid  than  those  of  our  intrepid  seamen  by  water,  it  is  not  because  the 
American  soldier  is  less  brave.  On  the  one  element,  organization,  discip- 
line, and  a  thorough  knowledge  of  their  duties,  exist,  on  the  part  of  the 
officers  and  their  men.  On  the  other,  almost  every  thing  is  yet  to  be  ac- 
quired. We  have,  however,  the  consolation  that  our  country  abounds  with 
the  richest  materials,  and  that  in  no  instance,  when  engaged  in  action, 
have  our  arms  been  tarnished.  At  Brownstown  and  at  Queenstown  the 
valor  of  veterans  was  displayed,  and  acts  of  the  noblest  heroism  were  per- 
formed. It  is  true  that  the  disgrace  of  Detroit  remains  to  be  wiped  off. 
That  is  a  subject  on  which  I  can  not  trust  my  feelings  ;  it  is  not  fitting  I 
should  speak.  But  this  much  I  will  say,  it  was  an  event  which  no  human 
foresight  could  have  anticipated,  and  for  which  the  administration  can  not 
be  justly  censured.     It  was  the  parent  of  all  the  misfortunes  we  have  ex- 


68  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

perienced  on  land.  But  for  it  the  Indian  war  would  have  been,  in  a  great 
measure,  prevented  or  terminated  ;  the  ascendency  on  lake  Erie  acquired, 
and  the  war  pushed  on,  perhaps,  to  Montreal.  With  the  exception  of  that 
event,  the  war,  even  upon  the  land,  has  been  attended  by  a  series  of  the 
most  brilliant  exploits,  which,  whatever  interest  they  may  inspire  on  this 
side  of  the  mountains,  have  given  the  greatest  pleasure  on  the  other. 
The  expedition,  under  the  command  of  Governor  Edwards  and  Colonel 
Russell,  to  lake  Pioria,  on  the  Illinois,  was  completely  successful.  So  was 
that  of  Captain  Craig,  who,  it  is  said,  ascended  that  river  still  higher. 
General  Hopkins  destroyed  the  prophet's  town.  We  have  just  received 
intelligence  of  the  gallant  enterprise  of  Colonel  Campbell.  In  short,  sir, 
the  Indian  towns  have  been  swept  from  the  mouth  to  the  source  of  the 
Wabash ;  and  a  hostile  country  has  been  penetrated  far  beyond  the 
most  daring  incursions  of  any  campaign,  during  the  former  Indian 
war.  Never  was  more  cool,  deliberate  bravery  displayed,  than  that 
by  Newman's  party,  from  Georgia.  And  the  capture  of  the  Detroit,  and 
the  destruction  of  the  Caledonia  (whether  placed  to  a 'maritime  or  land 
account),  for  judgment,  skill,  and  courage,  on  the  part  of  Lieutenant 
Elliott,  have  never  been  surpassed. 

It  is  alleged  that  the  elections  in  England  are  in  favor  of  the  ministry, 
and  that  those  in  this  country  are  against  the  war.  If,  in  such  a  cause 
(saying  nothing  of  the  impurity  of  their  elections)  the  people  of  that  coun- 
try have  rallied  round  their  government,  it  affords  a  salutary  lesson  to  the 
people  here  ;  who,  at  all  hazards,  ought  to  support  theirs,  struggling  as  it 
is  to  maintain  our  just  rights.  But  the  people  here  have  not  been  false 
to  themselves  ;  a  great  majority  approve  the  war,  as  is  evinced  by  the  re- 
cent re-election  of  the  chief  magistrate.  Suppose  it  were  even  true,  that 
an  entire  section  of  the  Union  were  opposed  to  the  war ;  that  section 
being  a  minority,  is  the  will  of  the  majority  to  be  relinquished  ?  In  that 
section  the  real  strength  of  the  opposition  had  been  greatly  exaggerated. 
Vermont  has,  by  two  successive  expressions  of  her  opinion,  approved  the 
declaration  of  war.  In  New  Hampshire,  parties  are  so  nearly  equipoised, 
that  out  of  thirty  or  thirty-five  thousand  votes,  those  who  approved  and 
are  for  supporting  it,  lost  the  election  by  only  one  thousand  or  one  thou- 
sand five  hundred.  In  Massachusetts  alone  have  they  obtained  any  con- 
siderable accession.  If  we  come  to  New  York,  we  shall  find  that  other 
and  local  causes  have  influenced  her  elections. 

What  cause,  Mr.  Chairman,  which  existed  for  declaring  the  war,  has 
been  removed  %  We  sought  indemnity  for  the  past,  and  security  for  the 
future.  The  orders  in  council  are  suspended,  not  revoked ;  no  compensa- 
tion for  spoliations ;  Indian  hostilities,  which  were  before  secretly  insti- 
gated, are  now  openly  encouraged ;  and  the  practice  of  impressment  unre- 
mittingly persevered  in  and  insisted  upon.  Yet  the  administration  has 
given  the  strongest  demonstrations  of  its  love  of  peace.  On  the  29  th 
of  June,  less  than  ten  days  after  the  declaration  of  war,  the  Secretary  of 


ON   THE   NEW   ARMY   BILL.  69 

State  writes  to  Mr.  Russell,  authorizing  him  to  agree  to  an  armistice,  upon 
two  conditions  only,  and  what   are  they  ?      That  the   orders  in  council 
should  be  repealed,  and  the  practice  of  impressing  American  seamen  cease, 
those  already  impressed  being  released.     The  proposition  was  for  nothing 
more  than  a  real  truce ;  that  the  war  should  in  fact  cease  on  both  sides. 
Again,  on  the   27th  of  July,  one  month  later,  anticipating  a  possible  ob- 
jection to  these    terms,  reasonable   as  they  are,  Mr.  Monroe  empowers 
Mr.  Russell  to  stipulate  in  general   terms  for  an  armistice,  having  only  a 
formal  understanding  on  these  points.     In  return,  the  enemy  is  offered  a 
prohibition  of  the  employment  of  his  seamen  in  our  service,  thus  remov- 
ing entirely  all  pretext  for  the  practice  of  impressment.     The  very  propo- 
sition which  the  gentleman  from  Connecticut  (Mr.  Pitkin)  contends  ought 
to  be  made,  has  been  made.     How  are  these  pacific  advances  met  by  the 
other   party?     Rejected  as  absolutely  inadmissible;  cavils   are  indulged 
about  the  inadequacy  of  Mr.  Russell's  powers,  and  the  want  of  an  act  of 
Congress  is  intimated.     And  yet  the  constant  usage  of  nations,  I  believe, 
is,  where  the  legislation  of  one  party  is  necessary  to  carry  into  effect  a 
given  stipulation,  to  leave  it  to  the  contracting  party  to  provide   the  re- 
quisite laws.     If  he  fail  to  do  so,  it  is  a  breach  of  good  faith,  and  becomes 
the  subject  of  subsequent  remonstrance  by  the  injured  party.     When  Mr. 
Russell  renews  the  overture,  in  what  was  intended  as  a  more  agreeable  form 
to  the  British  government,  Lord  Castlereagh  is  not  content  with  a  simple 
rejection,  but  clothes  it  in  the  language  of  insult.     Afterward,  in  conver- 
sation with  Mr.  Russell,  the  moderation  of  our  government  is  misinter- 
preted, and  made  the  occasion  of  a  sneer,  that  we  are  tired  of  the  war. 
The  proposition  of  Admiral  Warren  is  submitted  in  a  spirit  not  more  pa- 
cific.    He  is  instructed,  he  tells  us,  to  propose,  that  the  government  of 
the  United  States  shall  instantly  recall  their  letters  of  marque  and  reprisal 
against  British  ships,  together  with  all  orders  and  instructions  for  any  acts 
of  hostility  whatever,  against  the  territories  of  his  majesty,  or  the  persons 
or  property  of  his  subjects.     That  small  affair  being  settled,  he  is  further 
authorized  to  arrange  as  to  the  revocation  of  the  laws  which  interdict  the 
commerce  and  ships  of  war  of  his  majesty  from  the  harbors  and  waters 
of  the  United  States.     This  messenger  of  peace  comes  with  one  qualified 
concession  in  his  pocket,  not  made  to  the  justice  of  our  demands,  and  is 
fully  empowered  to  receive  our  homage,  a  contrite   retraction  of  all  our 
measures  adopted  against  his  master  !     And,  in  default,  he  does  not  fail  to 
assure  us,  the  orders  in  council  are  to  be  forthwith  revived.     The  admin- 
istration, still  anxious  to  terminate  the  war,  suppresses  the  indignation  which 
such  a  proposal  ought  to  have   created,  and,  in  its  answer,  concludes  by 
informing  Admiral  Warren,  "  that  if  there  be  no  objection  to  an  accommo- 
dation of  the  difference  relating  to  impressment,  in  the  mode  proposed, 
other  than  the  suspension  of  the  British  claim  to  impressment  during  the 
armistice,  there  can  be  none  to  proceeding,  without  the   armistice,  to  an 
immediate   discussion   and   arrangement  of  an  article   on  that  subject." 


70  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

Thus  it  has  left  the  door  of  negotiation  unclosed,  and  it  remains  to  be 
seen,  if  the  enemy  will  accept  the  invitation  tendered  to  him.  The  hon- 
orable gentleman  from  North  Carolina  (Mr.  Pearson)  supposes,  that  if 
Congress  would  pass  a  law,  prohibiting  the  employment  of  British  seamen 
in  our  service,  upon  condition  of  a  like  prohibition  on  their  part,  and  re- 
peal the  act  of  non-importation,  peace  would  immediately  follow.  Sir,  I 
have  no  doubt,  if  such  a  law  were  to  pass,  with  all  the  requisite  solem- 
nities, and  the  repeal  to  take  place,  Lord  Castlereagh  would  laugh  at  our 
simplicity.  No,  sir,  the  administration  has  erred  in  the  steps  which  it  has 
taken  to  restore  peace,  but  its  error  has  been  not  in  doing  too  little,  but 
in  betraying  too  great  a  solicitude  for  that  event.  An  honorable  peace 
is  attainable  only  by  an  efficient  war.  My  plan  would  be,  to  call  out  the 
ample  resources  of  the  country,  give  them  a  judicious  direction,  prosecute 
the  war  with  the  utmost  vigor,  strike  wherever  we  can  reach  the  enemy, 
at  sea  or  on  land,  and  negotiate  the  terms  of  a  peace  at  Quebec  or  at 
Halifax.  We  are  told  that  England  is  a  proud  and  lofty  nation,  which, 
disdaining  to  wait  for  danger,  meets  it  half  way.  Haughty  as  she  is, 
we  once  triumphed  over  her,  and,  if  we  do  not  listen  to  the  counsels  of 
timidity  and  despair,  we  shall  again  prevail.  In  such  a  cause,  with  the 
aid  of  Providence,  we  must  come  out  crowned  with  success ;  but  if  we 
fail,  let  us  fail  like  men,  lash  ourselves  to  our  gallant  tars,  and  expire 
together  in  one  common  struggle,  lighting  for  free  trade  and  seamen's 

EIGHTS. 


ON  MR.  CLAY'S  RETURN  FROM  GHENT. 

DELIVERED  AT  A  PUBLIC  DINNER  AT  LEXINGTON,  GIVEN  IN  HONOR 
OF  MR.  CLAY,  OCTOBER  7,  1815. 

[Mr.  Clay,  who  had  been  the  chief  prompter  of  the  war  with 
Great  Britain,  was  appointed  one  of  the  Commissioners  to  nego- 
tiate a  peace,  and,  as  has  ever  been  conceded,  was  greatly  influ- 
ential in  determining  the  conditions.  Christopher  Hughes,  the 
Secretary  of  that  Commission,  in  a  private  letter  to  Mr.  Clay, 
dated  November,  27,  1844,  at  London,  says  :  "  You  did  more  at 
that  Congress  than  any  of  its  members,  by  your  tact,  your  dis- 
cretion, your  moderation,  your  self-command,  and  your  incom- 
parable manner — more,  I  say,  than  any  other,  to  bestow  this 
most  blessed  boon  (of  peace)  among  men."  Mr.  Clay's  friends  at 
Lexington,  including  the  people  of  all  parties,  were  justly  proud, 
not  only  of  the  part  he  had  enacted  in  the  war,  but  especially  of 
his  instrumentality  in  making  peace  ;  and  on  his  return,  they 
gave  him  a  public  dinner.  One  of  the  toasts  was  as  follows  : 
"  Our  negotiators  at  Ghent  :  their  talents  at  diplomacy  have 
kept  pace  with  the  valor  of  our  arms,  in  demonstrating  to  the 
enemy  that  these  States  will  be  free."  Another  toast  was  :  "  Our 
guest,  Henry  Clay  :  we  welcome  his  return  to  that  country 
whose  rights  and  interests  he  has  so  ably  maintained  at  home 
and  abroad."  To  the  first  of  these  toasts  Mr.  Clay  made  the 
following  reply :] 

I  feel  myself  called  on,  by  the  sentiment  just  expressed,  to  return  my 
thanks,  in  behalf  of  my  colleagues  and  myself.  I  do  not,  and  am  quite  sure 
they  do  not,  feel,  that,  in  the  service  alluded  to,  they  are  at  all  entitled  to 
the  compliment  which  has  been  paid  them.  We  could  not  do  otherwiso 
than  reject  the  demand  made  by  the  other  party  ;  and  if  our  labors  finally 
terminated  in  an  honorable  peace,  it  was  owing  to  causes  on  this  side  of 
the  Atlantic,  and  not  to  any  exertion  of  ours.  Whatever  diversity  of 
opinion  may  have  existed  as  to  the  declaration  of  the  war,  there  are  some 
points  on  which  all  may  look  back  with  proud  satisfaction.     The  first  re- 


72  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY    CLAY. 

Iate3  to  the  time  of  the  conclusion  of  the  peace.  Had  it  been  made  im- 
mediately after  the  treaty  of  Paris,  we  should  have  retired  humiliated  from 
the  contest,  believing  that  we  had  escaped  the  severe  chastisement  with 
which  we  were  threatened,  and  that  we  owed  to  the  generosity  and  mag- 
nanimity of  the  enemy,  what  we  were  incapable  of  commanding  by  our 
arms.  That  magnanimity  would  have  been  the  theme  of  every  tongue, 
and  of  every  press,  abroad  and  at  home.  We  should  have  retired,  uncon- 
scious of  our  own  strength,  and  unconscious  of  the  utter  inability  of  the 
enemy,  with  his  whole  undivided  force,  to  make  any  serious  impression 
upon  us.  Our  military  character,  then  in  the  lowest  state  of  degradation, 
would  have  been  unretrieved.  Fortunately  for  us,  Great  Britain  chose 
to  try  the  issue  of  the  last  campaign.  And  the  issue  of  the  last  campaign 
has  demonstrated,  in  the  repulse  before  Baltimore,  the  retreat  from  Piatts- 
burg,  the  hard-fought  action  on  the  Niagara  frontier,  and  in  that  most 
glorious  day,  the  eighth  of  January,  that  we  have  always  possessed  the  finest 
elements  of  military  composition,  and  that  a  proper  use  of  them,  only,  was 
necessary,  to  insure  for  the  army  and  militia  a  fame  as  imperishable  as  that 
which  the  navy  had  previously  acquired. 

Another  point  which  appears  to  me  to  afford  the  highest  consolation  is, 
that  Ave  fought  the  most  powerful  nation,  perhaps,  in  existence,  single- 
handed  and  alone,  without  any  sort  of  alliance.  More  than  thirty  years 
has  Great  Britain  been  maturing  her  physical  means,  which  she  had  ren- 
dered as  efficacious  as  possible,  by  skill,  by  discipline,  and  by  actual  serv- 
ice. Proudly  boasting  of  the  conquest  of  Europe,  she  vainly  flattered 
herself  with  the  easy  conquest  of  America  also.  Her  veterans  were  put 
to  flight  or  defeated,  while  all  Europe — I  mean  the  governments  of  Europe 
— was  gazing  with  cold  indifference,  or  sentiments  of  positive  hatred  of 
us,  upon  the  arduous  contest.  Hereafter  no  monarch  can  assert  claims  of 
gratitude  upon  us,  for  assistance  rendered  in  the  hour  of  danger. 

There  is  another  view  of  which  the  subject  of  the  war  is  fairly  suscept- 
ible. From  the  moment  that  Great  Britain  came  forward  at  Ghent  with 
her  extravagant  demands,  the  war  totally  changed  its  character.  It  be- 
came, as  it  were,  a  new  war.  It  was  no  longer  an  American  war,  prose- 
cuted for  redress  of  British  aggressions  upon  American  rights,  but  became 
a  British  war,  prosecuted  for  objects  of  British  ambition,  to  be  accompanied 
by  American  sacrifices.  And  what  were  those  demands  ?  Here,  in  the 
immediate  neighborhood  of  a  sister  State  and  territories,  which  were  to  be 
made  in  part  the  victims,  they  must  have  been  felt,  and  their  enormity 
justly  appreciated.  They  consisted  of  the  erection  of  a  barrier  between 
Canada  and  the  United  States,  to  be  formed  by  cutting  off  from  Ohio  and 
some  of  the  territories  a  country  more  extensive  than  Great  Britain,  con- 
taining thousands  of  freemen,  who  were  to  be  abandoned  to  their  fate,  and 
creating  a  new  power,  totally  unknown  upon  the  continent  of  America ; 
of  the  dismantling  of  our  fortresses,  and  naval  power  on  the  lakes,  with 
the  surrender  of  the  military  occupation  of  those  waters  to  the  enemy,  and 


ON   HIS   RETURN    FROM    GHENT.  73 

of  an  arrondissement  for  two  British  provinces.  These  demands,  boldly 
asserted,  and  one  of  them  declared  to  be  a  sine  qua  non,  were  finally  re- 
linquished. Taking  this  view  of  the  subject,  if  there  be  loss  of  reputation 
by  either  party,  in  the  terms  of  peace,  who  has  sustained  it  ? 

The  effects  of  the  war  are  highly  satisfactory.  Abroad,  our  character, 
which  at  the  time  of  its  declaration  was  in  the  lowest  state  of  degradation, 
is  raised  to  the  highest  point  of  elevation.  It  is  impossible  for  any  Amer- 
ican to  visit  Europe,  without  being  sensible  of  this  agreeable  change,  in  the 
personal  attentions  which  he  receives,  in  the  praises  which  are  bestowed 
on  our  past  exertions,  and  the  predictions  which  are  made  as  to  our  future 
prospects.  At  home,  a  government,  which,  at  its  formation,  was  appre- 
hended by  its  best  friends,  and  pronounced  by  its  enemies  to  be  incapable 
of  standing  the  shock,  is  found  to  answer  all  the  purposes  of  its  institution. 
In  spite  of  the  errors  which  have  been  committed  (and  errors  have  undoubt- 
edly been  committed),  aided  by  the  spirit  and  patriotism  of  the  people,  it 
is  demonstrated  to  be  as  competent  to  the  objects  of  effective  war,  as  it 
has  been  before  proved  to  be  to  the  concerns  of  a  season  of  peace. 
Government  has  thus  acquired  strength  and  confidence.  Our  prospects 
for  the  future,  are  of  the  brightest  kind.  With  every  reason  to  count  on 
the  permanence  of  peace,  it  remains  only  for  the  Government  to  determine 
upon  military  and  naval  establishments  adapted  to  the  growth  and  exten- 
sion of  our  country  and  its  rising  importance,  keeping  in  view  a  gradual 
but  not  burdensome  increase  of  the  navy ;  to  provide  for  the  payment  of 
the  interest,  and  the  redemption  of  the  public  debt,  and  for  the  current  ex- 
penses of  Government.  For  all  these  objects,  the  existing  sources  of  the 
revenue  promise  not  only  to  be  abundantly  sufficient,  but  will  probably  leave 
ample  scope  to  the  exercise  of  the  judgment  of  Congress,  in  selecting  for 
repeal,  modification,  or  abolition,  those  which  may  be  found  most  oppress- 
ive, inconvenient,  or  unproductive. 

[In  reply  to  the  second  toast,  as  given  above,  Mr.  Clay  said  :] 

My  friends,  I  must  again  thank  you  for  your  kind  and  affectionate  attention. 
My  reception  has  been  more  like  that  of  a  brother  than  a  common  friend 
or  acquaintance,  and  I  am  utterly  incapable  of  finding  words  to  express  my 
gratitude.  My  situation  is  like  that  of  a  Swedish  gentleman,  at  a  dinner 
given  in  England  by  the  Society  of  Friends  of  Foreigners  in  Distress.  A 
toast  having  been  given  complimentary  to  his  country,  it  was  expected,  as 
is  usual  on  such  occasions,  that  he  would  rise  and  address  the  company. 
The  gentleman,  not  understanding  the  English  language,  rose  under  great 
embarassment,  and  said,  "  Sir,  I  wish  you  to  consider  me  a  foreigner  in 
distress."     I  wish  you,  gentlemen,  to  consider  me  a  friend  in  distress. 


ON  THE   BANK  QUESTION. 

MR.  CLAY'S  ADDRESS  TO  HIS  CONSTITUENTS,  LEXINGTON,  JUNE  3,  1816. 

[Mr.  Clay's  speech  in  the  House  of  Eepresentatives,  1816,  in 
favor  of  the  re-incorporation  of  the  Bank  of  the  United  States, 
was  not  published  ;  and  as  he  had  spoken  and  voted  against  the 
hill  for  the  re-charter  of  the  Bank  in  1811,  it  seemed  quite 
proper,  and  necessary  to  his  polititical  consistency,  that  he 
should  avail  himself  of  some  opportunity  to  give  his  reasons  for 
this  apparent  change  of  opinion.  In  our  introduction  to  his 
speech  on  this  subject,  in  1811,  we  have  endeavored  to  show, 
that  there  was  really  no  change  of  opinion,  but  simply  an  adapta- 
tion of  policy  to  a  change  of  circumstances  in  the  financial  and 
commercial  condition  of  the  nation.  In  1811,  the  State  banks 
were  in  a  good  condition,  and  competent,  if  required,  to  transact 
the  financial  affairs  of  the  general  government  ;  whereas,  the 
national  bank,  as  then  administered,  did  not  work  satisfactorily. 
It  could  be  dispensed  with,  if  the  State  banks  had  continued 
sound.  But  the  war  of  1812  gave  such  a  severe  trial  to  the  State 
bank  system,  as  nearly  to  break  it  down,  and  at  the  close  of  the 
war,  the  country  was  left  without  a  sound  currency.  Commerce, 
trade,  and  the  government,  were  equally  embarrassed  for  proper 
and  safe  financial  agents.  The  currency  had  utterly  failed  to 
furnish  an  agency  for  these  indispensable  purposes,  and  the  uni- 
versal cry  was  for  a  national  bank.  What  could  a  wise  and 
practical  statesman  do  in  such  a  case  ?  If  he  could  see  that  it 
was  merely  a  present  popular  demand,  soon  to  pass  over,  he 
might  risk  opposition  to  the  measure  ;  but  if  the  demand  was 
well  founded,  and  likely  to  become  louder  and  stronger  from  the 
necessities  of  the  country,  opposition  would  have  been  an  act 
of  folly.  The  success  of  the  bank  for  twenty  years  from  1816, 
proved  the  wisdom  of  the  measure.  It  executed  all  the  financial 
business  of  the  government  without  charge,  receiving  for  its  com- 
pensation the  use  of  the  public  deposits  ;  it  operated  as  a  salu- 
tary regulator  of  the  currency  by  its  check  on  unsound  State 


ON   THE   BANK   QUESTION.  75 

banks  ;  and  no  party  or  person  ever  suffered  the  loss  of  a  penny 
by  this  bank.  Nicholas  Biddle,  when  he  established  the  United 
States  Bank  of  Pennsylvania,  committed  the  injustice,  it  might 
be  called  a  fraud,  by  continuing  the  same  name — "  United  States 
Bank" — to  this  State  institution  ;  whereas  it  was  no  more  a  na- 
tional institution  than  a  hotel  or  oyster-cellar  called  by  that 
name,  of  which  there  are  specimens  in  every  city  of  the  United 
States  ;  and  when  Nicholas  Biddle's  State  bank,  wearing  this 
name,  like  a  seventy-four  gun  ship  floating  in  a  mill-pond,  failed, 
it  was  alleged  by  the  party  opposed  to  a  national  bank,  to  be  a 
national  bank  ;  and  to  this  day  more  than  half  of  the  people  of 
the  United  States  think  it  was  the  same  national  bank  which 
served  the  nation  and  the  commercial  public  so  well,  till  General 
Jackson,  in  1836,  vetoed  the  bill  to  re-charter  it.  Biddle's  bank 
failed,  because,  in  the  use  of  its  credit  and  funds,  he  entered  into 
commercial  speculations,  which  never  could  have  been  done,  if  the 
same  capital  had  been  in  a  national  bank,  as  it  would  have  had 
full  employment  as  a  national  institution.  -The  Committee  of 
Congress,  also,  appointed  for  a  periodical  inspection  of  the  affairs 
of  the  national  bank,  was  ever  an  effectual  check  on  such  a  per- 
version of  its  faculties.  But  the  State  of  Pennsylvania,  which 
conferred  the  charter  on  Nicholas  Biddle's  bank,  had  provided  no 
such  check.  With  a  capital  of  thirty-six  millions,  in  a  State 
bank,  which  must  be  employed  some  way,  Nicholas  Biddle 
launched  forth  into  his  wild  speculations,  and  hence  the  ruin  of 
the  bank.  The  following  address  is  a  lucid  exposition  of  Mr. 
Clay's  reasons  for  opposing  the  re-charter  of  the  bank  in  1811, 
and  for  advocating  the  bill  in  1816.] 

On  one  subject,  that  of  the  Bank  of  the  United  States,  to. which  at  the 
late  session  of  Congress  he  gave  his  humble  support,  Mr.  Clay  felt  par- 
ticularly anxious  to  explain  the  grounds  on  which  he  had  acted.  This  ex- 
planation, if  not  due  to  his  own  character,  the  State,  and  the  district  to 
which  he  belonged,  had  a  right  to  demand.  It  would  have  been  unneces- 
sary if  his  observations  addressed  to  the  House  of  Representatives,  pend- 
ing the  measure,  had  been  published ;  but  they  were  not  published,  and 
why  they  were  not  published  he  was  unadvised. 

When  he  was  a  member  of  the  Senate  of  the  United  States,  he  was  in- 
duced to  oppose  the  renewal  of  the  charter  to  the  old  Bank  of  the  United 
States  by  three  general  considerations.  The  first  was  that  he  was  in- 
structed to  oppose  it  by  the  Legislature  of  the  State.  What  were  the 
reasons  that  operated  with  the  Legislature  in  giving  the  instruction  he  did 
not  know.     He  has  understood  from  members  of  that  body,  at  the  time  it 


76  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

was  given,  that  a  clause,  declaring  that  Congress  had  no  power  to  grant 
the  charter,  was  stricken  out ;  from  which  it  might  be  inferred,  either  that 
the  Legislature  did  not  believe  a  bank  to  be  unconstitutional,  or  that  it  had 
formed  no  opinion  on  that  point.  This  inference  derives  additional  strength 
from  the  fact  that,  although  the  two  late  senators  from  this  State,  as  well 
as  the  present  senators,  voted  for  a  national  bank,  the  Legislature,  which 
must  have  been  well  apprised  that  such  a  measure  was  in  contemplation, 
did  not  again  interpose,  either  to  protest  against  the  measure  itself,  or  to 
censure  the  conduct  of  those  senators.  From  this  silence  on  the  part  of 
a  body  which  has  ever  fixed  a  watchful  eye  upon  the  proceedings  of  the 
general  government,  he  had  a  right  to  believe  that  the  Legislature  of  Ken- 
tucky saw,  without  dissatisfaction,  the  proposal  to  establish  a  national  ban!  ; 
and  that  its  opposition  to  the  former  one  was  upon  grounds  of  expediency, 
applicable  to  that  corporation  aloue,  or  no  longer  existing.  But  when,  at 
the  last  session,  the  question  came  up  as  to  the  establishment  of  a  national 
bank,  being  a  member  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  the  point  of  in- 
quiry with  him  was,  not  so  much  what  was  the  opinion  of  the  Legislature 

although  undoubtedly  the  opinion  of  a  body  so  respectable  would  have 

great  weight  with  him  under  any  circumstances — as  what  were  the  senti- 
ments of  his  immediate  constituents.  These  he  believed  to  be  in  favor  of 
such  an  institution  from  the  following  circumstances  :  In  the  first  place, 
his  predecessor  (Mr.  Hawkins)  voted  for  a  national  bank,  without  the 
slightest  murmur  of  discontent.  Secondly,  during  the  last  fall,  when  he 
was  in  his  district,  he  conversed  freely  with  many  of  his  constituents  upon 
that  subject,  then  the  most  common  topic  of  conversation,  and  all,  with- 
out a  single  exception,  as  far  as  he  recollected,  agreed  that  it  was  a  desir- 
able if  not  the  only  efficient  remedy  for  the  alarming  evils  in  the  currency 
of  the  country.  And  lastly,  during  the  session,  he  received  many  letters 
from  his  constituents,  prior  to  the  passage  of  the  bill,  all  of  which  con- 
curred, he  believed  without  a  solitary  exception,  in  advising  the  measure. 
So  far,  then,  from  being  instructed  by  his  district  to  oppose  the  bank,  he 
had  what  was,  perhaps,  tantamount  to  an  instruction  to  support  it — the 
acquiescence  of  his  constituents  in  the  vote  of  their  former  representative, 
and  the  communications,  oral,  and  written,  of  the  opinions  of  many  of 
them  in  favor  of  a  bank. 

The  next  consideration  which  induced  him  to  oppose  the  renewal  of  the 
old  charter  was,  that  he  believed  the  corporation  had,  during  a  portion  of 
the  period  of  its  existence,  abused  its  powers,  and  had  sought  to  subserve 
the  views  of  a  political  party.  Instances  of  its  oppression,  for  that  pur- 
pose, were  asserted  to  have  occurred  at  Philadelphia  and  at  Charleston ; 
and,  although  denied  in  Congress  by  the  friends  of  the  institution,  during 
the  discussions  on  the  application  for  the  renewal  of  the  charter,  they 
were  in  his  judgment,  satisfactorily  made  out.  This  oppression,  indeed, 
was  admitted  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  in  the  debate  on  the  present 
bank,  by  a  distinguished  member  of  that  party  which  had  so  warmly 


ON   THE   BANK   QUESTION.  77 

espoused  the  renewal  of  the  old  charter.  It  may  be  said,  what  security  is 
there  that  the  new  bank  will  not  imitate  this  example  of  oppression  ?  He 
answered,  the  fate  of  the  old  bank,  warning  all  similar  institutions  to  shun 
politics,  with  which  they  ought  not  to  have  any  concern ;  the  existence  of 
abundant  competition,  arising  from  the  great  multiplication  of  banks ;  and 
the  precautions  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  details  of  the  present  bill. 

A  third  consideration  upon  which  he  acted  in  1811,  was,  that  as  the 
power  to  create  a  corporation,  such  as  was  proposed  to  be  continued,  was 
not  specifically  granted  in  the  Constitution,  and  did  not  then  appear  to 
him  to  be  necessary  to  carry  into  effect  any  of  the  powers  which  were 
specifically  granted,  Congress  was  not  authorized  to  continue  the  bank. 
The  Constitution,  he  said,  contained  powers  delegated  and  prohibitory, 
powers  expressed  and  constructive.  It  vests  in  Congress  all  powers  neces- 
sary to  give  effect  to  the  enumerated  powrers — all  that  may  be  necessary  to 
put  in  motion  and  activity  the  machine  of  government  which  it  constructs. 
The  powers  lhat  may  be  so  necessary  are  deducible  by  construction.  They 
are  not  defined  in  the  Constitution.  They  are,  from  their  nature,  indefin- 
able. When  the  question  is  in  relation  to  one  of  these  powers,  the  point 
of  inquiry  should  be,  is  its  exertion  necessary  to  carry  into  effect  any  of 
the  enumerated  powers  and  objects  of  the  general  government  ?  With 
regard  to  the  degree  of  necessity  vaiious  rules  have  been,  at  different 
times,  laid  down ;  but,  perhaps,  at  last,  there  is  no  other  than  a  souud  and 
honest  judgment,  exercised  under  the  checks  and  control  which  belong  to 
the  Constitution  and  to  the  people. 

The  constructive  powers  being  auxiliary  to  the  specifically  granted 
powers,  and  depending  for  their  sanction  and  existence  upon  a  necessity  to 
give  effect  to  the  latter,  which  necessity  is  to  be  sought  for  and  ascertained 
by  a  sound  and  honest  discretion,  it  is  manifest  that  this  necessity  may 
not  be  perceived,  at  -one  time  under  one  state  of  things,  when  it  is  per- 
ceived, at  another  time,  under  a  different  state  of  things.  The  Constitution, 
it  is  true,  never  changes ;  it  is  always  the  same  ;  but  the  force  of  cir- 
cumstances and  the  lights  of  experience  may  evolve  to  the  fallible  persons 
charged  with  its  administration,  the  fitness  and  necessity  of  a  particular 
exercise  of  constructive  power  to-day,  which  they  did  not  see  at  a  former 
period. 

Mr.  Clay  proceeded  to  remark,  that  when  the  application  was  made  to 
renew  the  old  charter  of  the  Bank  of  the  United  States,  such  an  institu- 
tion did  not  appear  to  him  to  be  so  necessary  to  the  fulfillment  of  any 
of  the  objects  specially  enumerated  in  the  Constitution,  as  to  justify  Con- 
gress in  assuming,  by  construction,  a  power  to  establish  it.  It  was  sup- 
ported mainly  upon  the  ground  that  it  was  indispensable  to  the  treasury 
operations.  But  the  local  institutions  in  the  several  States  were,  at  that 
time,  in  prosperous  existence,  confided  in  by  the  community,  having  a  con- 
fidence in  each  other,  and  maintaining  an  intercourse  and  connection  the 
most  intimate.     Many  of  them  were  actually  employed  by  the  treasury  to 


78  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

aid  that  department  in  a  part  of  its  fiscal  arrangements ;  and  they  appeared 
to  him  to  be  fully  capable  of  affording  to  it  all  the  facility  that  it  ought 
to  desire  in  all  of  them.  They  superseded,  in  his  judgment,  the  necessity 
of  a  national  institution.  But  how  stood  the  case  in  1816,  when  he  was 
called  upon  again  to  examine  the  power  of  the  general  government  to 
incorporate  a  national  bank  ?  A  total  change  of  circumstances  was  pre- 
sented ;  events  of  the  utmost  magnitude  had  intervened. 

A  general  suspension  of  specie  payments  had  taken  place,  and  this 
had  led  to  a  train  of  consequences  of  the  most  alarming  nature.  He 
beheld,  dispersed  over  the  immense  extent  of  the  United  States,  about 
three  hundred  banking  institutions,  enjoying  in  different  degrees  the  con- 
fidence of  the  public,  shaken  as  to  them  all,  under  no  direct  control  of  the 
general  government,  and  subject  to  no  actual  responsibility  to  the  State 
authorities.  These  institutions  were  emitting  the  actual  currency  of  the 
United  States ;  a  currency  consisting  of  a  paper,  on  which  they  neither 
paid  interest  nor  principal,  while  it  was  exchanged  for  the  paper  of  the 
community,  on  which  both  were  paid.  He  saw  these  institutions  in  fact 
exercising  what  had  been  considered,  at  all  times,  and  in  all  countries,  one 
of  the  highest  attributes  of  sovereignty,  the  regulation  of  the  current  me- 
dium of  the  country.  They  were  no  longer  competent  to  assist  the  treas- 
ury in  either  of  the  great  operations  of  collection,  deposit,  or  distribution, 
of  the  public  revenues.  In  fact,  the  paper  which  they  emitted,  and  which 
the  treasury,  from  the  force  of  events,  found  itself  constrained  to  receive, 
was  constantly  obstructing  the  operations  of  that  department.  For  it 
would  accumulate  where  it  was  not  wanted,  and  could  not  be  used  where  it 
was  wanted  for  the  purposes  of  government,  without  a  ruinous  and  arbitrary 
brokerage.  Every  man  who  paid  or  received  from  the  government,  paid 
or  received  as  much  less  than  he  ouodit  to  have  done  as  was  the  difference 
between  the  medium  in  which  the  payment  was  effected  and  specie. 
Taxes  were  no  longer  uniform.  In  New  England,  where  specie  payments 
have  not  been  suspended,  the  people  were  called  upon  to  pay  larger  con- 
tributions than  where  they  were  suspended.  In  Kentucky  as  much  more 
was  paid  by  the  people  in  their  taxes  than  was  paid,  for  example,  in  the 
State  of  Ohio,  as  Kentucky  paper  was  worth  more  than  Ohio  paper. 

It  appeared  to  Mr.  Clay,  that,  in  this  condition  of  things,  the  general 
government  could  depend  no  longer  upon  these  local  institutions,  multi- 
plied and  multiplying  daily  ;  coming  into  existence  by  the  breath  of  eight- 
een State  sovereignties,  some  of  which  by  a  single  act  of  volition  had 
created  twenty  or  thirty  at  a  time.  Even  if  the  resumption  of  specie  pay- 
ments could  have  been  anticipated,  the  general  government  remaining 
passive,  it  did  not  seem  to  him  that  the  general  government  ought  longer 
to  depend  upon  these  local  institutions  exclusively  for  aid  in  its  operations. 
But  he  did  not  believe  it  could  be  justly  so  anticipated.  It  was  not  the 
interest  of  all  of  them  that  the  renewal  of  specie  payments  should  take 
place,  and  yet,  without  concert  between  all  or  most  of  them  it  could  not  be 


ON   THE   BANK   QUESTION,  79 

effected.     With  regard  to  those  disposed  to  return  to  a  regular  state  of 
thino-s,  great  difficulties  mio-ht  arise  as  to  the  time  of  its  commencement. 

Considering,  then,  that  the  state  of  the  currency  was  such  that  no  think- 
ing man  could  contemplate  it  without  the  most  serious  alarm  ;  that  it 
threatened  general  distress,  if  it  did  not  ultimately  lead  to  convulsion  and 
subversion  of  the  government ;  it  appeared  to  him  to  be  the  duty  of  Con- 
gress to  apply  a  remedy,  if  a  remedy  could  be  devised.  A  national  bank, 
with  other  auxiliary  measures,  was  proposed  as  that  remedy.  Mr.  Clay 
said,  he  determined  to  examine  the  question  with  as  little  prejudice  as 
possible  arising  from  his  former  opinion.  He  knew  that  the  safest  course 
to  him,  if  he  pursued  a  cold,  calculating  prudence,  was  to  adhere  to  that 
opinion,  right  or  wrong.  He  was  perfectly  aware  that  if  he  changed,  or 
seemed  to  change  it,  he  should  expose  himself  to  some  censure.  But 
looking  at  the  subject  with  the  light  shed  upon  it  by  events  happening 
since  the  commencement  of  the  war,  he  could  no  longer  doubt.  A  bank 
appeared  to  him  not  only  necessary,  but  indispensably  necessary,  in  connec- 
tion with  another  measure,  to  remedy  the  evils  of  which  all  were  but  too 
sensible.  He  preferred  to  the  suggestions  of  the  pride  of  consistency  the 
evident  interests  of  the  community,  and  determined  to  throw  himself  upon 
their  candor  and  justice.  That  which  appeared  to  him  in  1811,  under 
the  state  of  things  then  existing,  not  to  be  necessary  to  the  general  gov- 
ernment, seemed  now  to  be  necessary,  under  the  present  state  of  things. 
Had  he  then  foreseen  what  now  exists,  and  no  objection  had  lain  against 
the  renewal  of  the  charter  other  than  that  derived  from  the  Constitution, 
he  should  have  voted  for  the  renewal. 

Other  provisions  of  the  Constitution,  but  little  noticed,  if  noticed  at  all, 
in  the  discussions  in  Congress  in  1811,  would  seem  to  urge  that  body  to 
exert  all  its  powers  to  restore  to  a  sound  state  the  money  of  the  country, 
lhat  instrument  confers  upon  Congress  the  power  to  coin  money,  and  to 
regulate  the  valuo  of  foreign  coins  ;  and  the  States  are  prohibited  to  coin 
money,  to  emit  bills  of  credit,  or  to  make  any  thing  but  gold  and  silver 
coin  a  tender  in  payment  of  debts.  The  plain  inference  is,  that  the  sub- 
ject of  the  general  currency  was  intended  to  be  submitted  exclusively  to 
the  general  government.  In  point  of  fact,  however,  the  regulation  of  the 
general  currency  is  in  the  hands  of  the  State  governments,  or,  which  is 
the  same  thing,  of  the  banks  created  by  them.  Their  paper  has  every 
quality  of  money,  except  that  of  being  made  a  tender,  and  even  this  is 
imparted  to  it  by  some  States,  in  the  law  by  which  a  creditor  must  re- 
ceive it,  or  submit  to  a  ruinous  suspension  of  the  payment  of  his  debt. 
It  was  incumbent  upon  Congress  to  recover  the  control  which  it  had  lost 
over  the  general  currency.  The  remedy  called  for,  was  one  of  caution 
and  moderation,  but  of  firmness.  "Whether  a  remedy  directly  acting  upon 
the  banks  and  their  paper  thrown  into  circulation,  was  in  the  power  of 
the  general  government  or  not,  neither  Congress  nor  the  community  were 
prepared  for  the  application  of  such  a  remedy.     An  indirect  remedy,  of 


80  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY   CLAY. 

a  milder  character,  seemed  to  be  furnished  by  a  national  bank.  Going 
into  operation,  with  the  powerful  aid  of  the  treasury  of  the  United 
States,  he  believed  it  would  be  highly  instrumental  in  the  renewal  of 
specie  payments.  Coupled  with  the  other  measure  adopted  by  Congress 
for  that  object,  he  believed  the  remedy  effectual.  The  local  banks  must 
follow  the  example  which  the  national  bank  would  set  them,  of  redeem- 
ing their  notes  by  the  payment  of  specie,  or  their  notes  will  be  discredited 
and  put  down. 

If  the  Constitution,  then,  warranted  the  establishment  of  a  bank,  other 
considerations,  beside  those  already  mentioned,  strongly  urged  it.  The 
want  of  a  general  medium  is  everywhere  felt.  Exchange  varies  con- 
tinually, not  only  between  different  parts  of  the  Union,  but  between  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  same  city.  If  the  paper  of  a  national  bank  were  not 
redeemed  in  specie,  it  would  be  much  better  than  the  current  paper, 
since,  although  its  value  in  comparison  with  specie  might  fluctuate,  it 
would  afford  a  uniform  standard. 

If  political  power  be  incidental  to  banking  corporations,  there  ought, 
perhaps,  to  be  in  the  general  government  some  counterpoise  to  that  which 
is  exerted  by  the  States.  Such  a  counterpoise  might  not  indeed  be  so  nec- 
essary, if  the  States  exercised  the  power  to  incorporate  banks  equally,  or 
in  proportion  to  their  respective  populations.  But  that  is  not  the  case.  A 
single  State  has  a  banking  capital  equivalent,  or  nearly  so,  to  one  fifth  of 
the  whole  banking  capital  of  the  United  States.  Four  States  combined, 
have  the  major  part  of  the  banking  capital  of  the  United  States.  In  the 
event  of  any  convulsion,  in  which  the  distribution  of  banking  institutions 
might  be  important,  it  may  be  urged,  that  the  mischief  would  not  be 
alleviated  by  the  creation  of  a  national  bank,  since  its  location  must  be 
within  one  of  the  States.  But  in  this  respect  the  location  of  the  bank  is 
extremely  favorable,  being  in  one  of  the  middle  States,  not  likely  from  its 
position,  as  well  as  its  loyalty,  to  concur  in  any  scheme  for  subverting  the 
government.  And  a  sufficient  security  against  such  contingency  is  to  be 
found  in  the  distribution  of  branches  in  different  States,  acting  and  react- 
ing  upon  the  parent  institution,  and  upon  each  other. 


ON  THE  DIRECT  TAX,  AND  THE  STATE  OF  THE 
NATION  AFTER  THE  WAR  OF  1812, 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OP  REPRESENTATIVES,  JANUARY,  1816. 

[After  the  war  of  1812,  the  revenue  of  the  government  from 
the  customs,  and  a  small  demand  for  the  public  lands,  were  found 
insufficient  for  the  public  expenditures,  and  to  pay  the  interest 
on  the  public  debt — a  striking  contrast  to  that  plethoric  con- 
dition of  the  national  treasury  which  has  characterized  its  con- 
dition of  late  years,  since  the  difficulty  has  been,  not  to  obtain  a 
revenue,  but  how  to  employ  it.  A  direct  tax  for  national  pur- 
poses, is  always  a  delicate  and  obnoxious  measure.  But  after 
the  war  of  1812,  it  became  necessary  ;  hence  a  renewed  attack 
by  the  opposition  on  the  administration,  for  the  war  and  the 
consequent  increase  of  the  public  debt,  the  interest  on  which,  at 
least,  must  be  provided  for  by  a  prudent  government.  The 
terms  of  the  peace,  too,  were  assailed  by  the  opposition.  In  this 
argument,  Mr.  Clay  found  himself  assailed,  as  one  of  the  Com- 
missioners at  Ghent.  We  had  gained  nothing  by  the  war,  it  was 
said — not  even  the  abandonment,  on  the  part  of  Great  Britain, 
of  the  right  of  impressment,  for  which  practice  the  war  had  been 
declared  and  prosecuted.  For  this  reason,  it  was  contended,  we 
had  gained  nothing  but  disgrace  and  the  war  debt.  It  will  be 
seen  that  these  attacks  of  the  opposition  opened  the  broad 
question  of  the  state  of  the  country,  and  called  on  Mr.  Clay  to 
vindicate  the  results  of  the  Commission  at  Ghent.  The  bug-bear 
of  a  standing  army,  was  also  brought  into  the  arena,  although  it 
was  not  proposed  to  have  more  than  ten  thousand  men  for  all 
our  forts  and  frontiers.  It  was  proposed  by  the  opposition  to 
reduce  the  army  to  four  or  five  thousand.  This  Mr.  Clay  thought 
altogether  inadequate.  The  variety  of  important  questions  dis- 
cussed in  the  following  speech,  growing  out  of  the  circumstances 
of  the  country  at  that  time,  and  the  bold  and  statesmanlike 
manner  in  which  they  are  treated,  constitute  an  historical  epit- 
ome of  great  interest.     We  are  instructed  by  it  in  these  affairs, 

6 


82  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   OLAY. 

and  the  speech  casts  a  light  upon  them  which  can  nowhere  else 
fee  found.  Mr.  Clay  never  speaks  without  shedding  the  light  of 
his  own  peculiar  and  practical  views  on  the  topics  which  he 
handles.  We  do  not  find  much  about  taxes  in  this  speech  ;  but 
we  find  a  state  of  the  country  disclosed  which  would  make  the 
people  content  with  the  burden  ;  and  that  was  the  most  im- 
portant practical  result.  It  was  important  to  give  satisfactory 
reasons  of  silence  as  to  the  British  claim  of  impressment ;  and 
the  result,  down  to  this  time,  has  shown  that  Mr.  Clay  was 
right.  That  claim  has  never  been  re-asserted,  and  never  will  be. 
It  is  dead.  For  all  practical  purposes,  therefore,  the  main  pur- 
pose of  the  war  was  achieved.  To  require  a  formal  abandon- 
ment of  the  claim,  which  Great  Britain  had  already  ceased  to 
exercise,  since  she  had  found  that  this  country  would  never  en- 
dure it,  and  which  for  the  same  reason  she  would  never  presume 
to  attempt  again,  as  was  understood  by  the  parties  engaged  in 
the  negotiation,  would  have  been  supreme  folly,  considering  the 
state  of  Europe  at  that  time,  when  Great  Britain,  disengaged 
from  her  war  on  the  Continent,  was  prepared  to  send  all  her 
forces,  naval  and  military,  against  us.  Her  national  pride,  and 
perhaps  her  power,  were  concerned  in  maintaining  the  principle, 
though  she  never  intended  to  reduce  it  to  practice  in  relation  to 
us.  The  Commissioners,  therefore,  wisely  concluded  to  waive 
the  question,  knowing  very  well  that  we  should  never  hear  from 
it  again,  as  we  have  not.  It  can  not  be  denied,  that  Mr.  Clay's 
vindication  of  the  Commissioners  was  triumphant ;  and  so  of  the 
policy  of  the  war. 

Mr.  Clay  strongly  hints,  in  this  speech,  at  that  policy  of  pro- 
tecting Americn  manufactures,  of  which  he  afterward  became  the 
leading  advocate ;  and  he  turns  a  sympathizing  eye  on  the  Spanish 
American  Colonies,  struggling  for  independence,  suggesting  that 
it  might  yet  be  the  policy  of  the  United  States  to  aid  them  more 
effectually  than  by  mere  sympathy.  Two  years  afterward  he 
began  to  advocate  a  recognition  of  their  independence. 

Internal  improvements,  by  means  of  roads  running  through  the 
entire  line  of  the  States,  North  and  South,  East  and  West,  are 
also  distinctly  advocated  in  this  speech — a  project  which  after- 
ward so  eminently  distinguished  Mr.  Clay's  political  career.  The 
net-work  of  railways,  which  now  overlie  the  country,  was  not 
then  foreseen.  It  was  such  works  as  the  Cumberland  road 
which  Mr.  Clay  at  this  time  had  in  his  eye,  and  which  was  after- 
ward achieved  by  his  sole  influence  in  the  national  councils.] 


ON   THE   DIRECT   TAX.  83 

Mr.  Clay  (in  Committee  of  the  Whole),  said,  the  course  had  been  pur- 
sued, ever  since  he  had  the  honor  of  a  seat  on  this  floor,  to  select  some 
subject  during  the  early  part  of  the  session,  on  which,  by  a  general  under- 
standing, gentlemen  were  allowed  to  indulge  themselves  in  remarks  on  the 
existing  state  of  public  affairs.  The  practice  was  a  very  good  one,  he  said, 
and  there  could  be  no  occasion  more  proper  than  that  of  a  proposition  to 
lay  a  direct  tax. 

Those  who  have  for  fifteen  years  past  administered  the  affairs  of  this 
government,  have  conducted  this  nation  to  an  honorable  point  of  eleva- 
tion, at  which  they  may  justly  pause,  challenge  a  retrospect,  and  invite 
attention  to  the  bright  field  of  prosperity  which  lies  before  us. 

The  great  objects  of  the  Committee  of  Finance,  in  the  report  under  con- 
sideration, are,  in  the  first  place,  to  provide  for  the  payment  of  the  public 
debts,  and  in  the  second,  to  provide  for  the  support  of  the  government, 
and  the  payment  of  such  expenses  as  should  be  authorized  by  Congress. 
The  greater  part  of  the  debt,  Mr.  Clay  admitted,  had  grown  out  of  the  late 
war ;  yet  a  considerable  portion  of  it  consisted  of  that  contracted  in  the 
former  war  for  independence,  and  a  portion  of  it,  perhaps,  of  that  which 
arose  out  of  the  wars  with  Tripoli  and  Algiers.  Gentlemen  had,  on  this 
occasion,  therefore,  fairly  a  right  to  examine  into  the  course  of  administra- 
tion heretofore,  to  demonstrate  the  impolicy  of  those  wars,  and  the  inju- 
dieiousness  of  the  public  expenditures  generally.  In  the  cursory  view 
which  he  should  take  of  this  subject,  he  must  be  allowed  to  say,  he  should 
pay  no  particular  attention  to  what  had  passed  before,  in  debate. 

An  honorable  colleague  (Mr.  Hardin)  who  spoke  the  other  day,  like 
another  gentleman  who  preceded  him  in  debate,  had  taken  occasion  to 
refer  to  his  (Mr.  Clay's)  late  absence  from  this  country  on  public  business ; 
but  Mr.  Clay  said,  lie  trusted,  among  the  fruits  of  that  absence  were  a 
greater  respect  for  the  institutions  which  distinguish  this  happy  country,  a 
greater  confidence  in  them,  and  an  increased  disposition  to  cling  to  them. 
Yes,  sir,  I  was  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  battle  of  Waterloo,  and  some 
lessons  I  did  derive  from  it ;  but  they  were  lessons  which  satisfied  me,  that 
national  independence  was  only  to  be  maintained  by  national  resistance 
against  foreign  encroachments,  by  cherishing  the  interests  of  the  people, 
and  giving  to  the  whole  physical  power  of  the  country  an  interest  in  the 
preservation  of  the  nation.  I  have  been  taught  that  lesson;  that  we 
should  never  lose  sight  of  the  possibility  that  a  combination  of  despots, 
of  men  unfriendly  to  liberty,  propagating  what,  in  their  opinion,  constitutes 
the  principle  of  legitimacy,  might  reach  our  happy  land,  and  subject  us 
to  that  tyranny  and  degradation  which  seems  to  be  one  of  their  objects  in 
another  country.  The  result  of  my  reflections  is,  the  determination  to  aid 
with  my  vote  in  providing  my  country  with  all  the  means  to  protect  its 
liberties,  and  guard  them  even  from  serious  menace.  Motives  of  delicacy 
which  the  committee  would  be  able  to  understand  and  appreciate,  pre- 
vented him  from  noticing  some  of  his  colleague's  (Mr.  Hardin's)  remarks  ; 


84  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

but  he  would  take  the  occasion  to  give  him  one  admonition — that  when  he 
next  favored  the  House  with  an  exhibition  of  his  talent  for  wit,  with  a  dis- 
play of  those  elegant  implements,  for  his  possession  of  which  the  gentle- 
man from  Virginia  had  so  handsomely  complimented  him — that  he  would 
recollect  that  it  is  bought,  and  not  borrowed  wit  which  the  adage  recom- 
mends as  best.  With  regard  to  the  late  war  with  Great  Britain,  history, 
in  deciding  upon  the  justice  and  policy  of  that  war,  will  determine  the 
question  according  to  the  state  of  things  which  existed  when  that  war 
was  declared.  I  gave  a  vote  for  the  declaration  of  war.  I  exerted  all 
the  little  influence  and  talents  T  could  command  to  make  the  war.  The 
war  was  made  ;  it  is  terminated  ;  and  I  declare  with -perfect  sincerity,  if 
it  had  been  permitted  me  to  lift  the  vail  of  futurity,  and  to  have  foreseen 
the  precise  series  of  events  which  has  occurred,  my  vote  would  have  been 
unchanged.  The  policy  of  the  war,  as  it  regarded  our  state  of  preparation, 
must  be  determined  with  reference  to  the  state  of  things  at  the  time  that 
war  was  declared.  He  need  not  take  up  the  time  of  the  House  in  demon- 
strating that  we  had  cause  sufficient  for  war.  We  had  been  insulted,  and 
outraged,  and  spoliated  upon  by  almost  all  Europe — by  Great  Britain,  by 
France,  Spain,  Denmark,  Naples,  and,  to  cap  the  climax,  by  the  little, 
contemptible  power  of  Algiers.  We  had  submitted  too  long  and  too 
much.  We  had  become  the  scorn  of  foreign  powers,  and  the  contempt 
of  our  own  citizens.  The  question  of  the  policy  of  declaring  war  at  the 
particular  time  when  it  was  commenced  is  best  determined  by  applying  to 
the  enemy  himself ;  and  what  said  he?  That  of  all  the  circumstances 
attending  its  declaration,  none  was  so  aggravating  as  that  we  should  have 
selected  the  moment  which,  of  all  others,  was  most  inconvenient  to  him, 
when  he  was  struggling  for  self-existence  in  a  last  effort  against  the 
gigantic  power  of  France !  The  question  of  the  state  of  preparation  for 
war,  at  any  time,  is  a  relative  question — relative  to  our  own  means,  the 
condition  of  the  other  power,  and  the  state  of  the  world  at  the  time  of 
declaring  it.  We  could  not  expect,  for  instance,  that  a  war  against  Al- 
giers would  require  the  same  means  or  extent  of  preparation  as  a  war 
against  Great  Britain ;  and  if  it  was  to  be  waged  against  one  of  the 
primary  powers  of  Europe,  at  peace  with  all  the  rest  of  the  world,  and 
therefore  all  her  force  at  command,  it  could  not  be  commenced  with  so 
little  preparation  as  if  her  whole  force  were  employed  in  another  quarter. 
It  is  not  necessary  again  to  repel  the  stale,  ridiculous,  false  story  of  French 
influence,  originating  in  Great  Britain,  and  echoed  here.  I  now  contend, 
as  I  have  always  done,  that  we  had  a  right  to  take  advantage  of  the  con- 
dition of  the  world,  at  the  time  war  was  declared.  If  Great  Britain  were 
engaged  in  war,  we  had  a  right  to  act  on  the  knowledge  of  the  fact,  that 
her  means  of  annoyance,  as  to  us,  were  diminished  ;  and  we  had  a  right 
to  obtain  all  the  collateral  aid  we  could,  from  the  operations  of  other 
powers  against  her,  without  entering  into  those  connections  which  are  for- 
bidden by  the  genius  of  our  government.     But  it  was  rather  like  disturb- 


ON   THE   DIRECT   TAX.  85 

ing  the  ashes  of  the  dead,  now  to  discuss  the  questions  of  the  justice  or 
expediency  of  the  war.  They  were  questions  long  since  settled,  and  on 
which  the  public  opinion  was  decisively  made  up  in  favor  of  the  adminis- 
tration. 

He  proceeded  to  examine  the  conditions  of  the  peace  and  the  fruits  of 
the  war — questions  of  more  recent  date,  and  more  immediately  applicable 
to  the  present  discussion.  The  terms  of  the  peace  must  be  determined  by  the 
same  rule  that  was  applicable  to  the  declaration  of  war — that  rule  wbich  was 
furnished  by  the  state  of  the  world  at  the  time  the  peace  was  made ;   and 
even  if  it  were  true  that  all  the  sanguine  expectations  which  might  have 
been  formed  at  the  time  of  the  declaration  of  war,  were  not  realized  by 
the  teims  of  the  subsequent  peace,  it  did  not  follow  that  the  war  was  im- 
properly declared,  or  the  peace  dishonorable,  unless  the  condition  of  the 
parties,  in   relation    to   other   powers,  remained   substantially   the    same 
throughout  the  struggle,  and  at  the  time  of  the  termination  of  the  war,  as 
it  was  at  the  commencement  of  it.     At  the  termination  of  the  war  France 
was    annihilated — blotted    out   of  the    map    of  Europe;  the   vast   power 
wielded  by  Bonaparte  existed  no  longer.     Let  it  be  admitted  that  states- 
men, in  laying  their  course,  are  to  look  at  probable  events  ;  that  their  con- 
duct is  to  be  examined  with  reference  to  the  course  of  events  which,  in  all 
human  probability,  might  have  been  anticipated  ;  and  is  there  a  man  in 
this  House,  in  existence,  who  can  say,  that  on  the  18th  day  of  June,  1812, 
when  the  war  was  declared,  it  would  have  been  anticipated  that   Great 
Britain,  by  the  circumstance  of  a  general  peace,  resulting  from  the  over- 
throw of  a  power  whose  basements  were  supposed  to  be  deeper  laid,  more 
ramified,  and  more  extended   than  those  of  any  power  ever  were  before, 
would  be  placed  in  the  attitude  in  which  she  stood  in  December,  1814? 
Would  any  one  say  that  this  government  could  have  anticipated  such  a 
state  of  things,  and  ought  to  have   been  governed  in  its  conduct  accord- 
ingly ?     Great  Britain,  Russia,  Germany,  did  not  expect — not  a  power  in 
Europe  believed — as  late   even  as   January,    1814,  that   in   the   ensuing 
March,  Bonaparte  would  abdicate,  and  the  restoration  of  the  Bourbons 
would  follow.     What  then  was  the  actual  condition  of  Europe  when  peace 
was  concluded?     A  perfect  tranquillity  reigned  throughout ;  for  as  late  as 
the  1st  of  March,  the  idea  of  Napoleon's   reappearing  in  France  was  as 
little  enttitained  as  that  of  a  man's  coming  from  the  moon  to  take  upon 
himself  the  government  of  the  country.     In  December,  1814,  a  profound 
and  apparently  a  permanent  peace  existed ;  Great  Britain  was  left  to  dis- 
pose of  the  vast  force,  the  accumulation  of  twenty-five  years,  the  work  of 
an  immense  system  of  finance  and  protracted  war ;  she  was  at  liberty  to 
employ  that  undivided  force  against  this  country.     Under  such  circum- 
stances it  did  not  follow,  according  to  the  rules  laid  down,  either  that  the 
war  ought  not  to  have  been  made,  or  that  peace  on  such  terms  ought  not 
to  have  been  concluded. 

What,  then,  were  the  terms  of  the  peace  ?     The  regular  opposition  in 


86  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

this  country,  the  gentlemen  on  the  other  side  of  the  House,  had  not  come 
out  to  challenge  an  investigation  of  the  terms  of  the  peace,  although  they 
{had  several  times  given  a  sidewipe  at  the  treaty,  on  occasions  with  which 
it  had  no  necessary  connection.  It  had  been  sometimes  said,  that  we  had 
gained  nothing  by  the  war,  that  the  fisheries  were  lost,  etc.  How,  he 
asked,  did  this  question  of  the  fisheries  really  stand  ?  By  the  first  part  of 
the  third  article  of  the  treaty  of  1783,  the  right  was  recognized  in  the 
people  of  the  United  States  to  take  fish  of  every  kind  on  the  Grand  Bank, 
and  on  all  the  other  banks  of  Newfoundland;  also  in  the  Gulf  of  St.  Law- 
rence, and  at  all  other  places  in  the  sea,  where  the  inhabitants  of  both 
countries  used  at  any  time  to  fish.  This  right  was  a  necessary  incident  to 
our  sovereignty,  although  it  is  denied  to  some  of  the  powers  of  Europe. 
It  was  not  contested  at  Ghent ;  it  has  never  been  drawn  in  question  by 
Great  Britain.  But  by  the  same  third  article  it  was  further  stipulated, 
that  the  inhabitants  of  the  United  States  shall  have  "  liberty  to  take  fish 
of  every  kind  on  such  part  of  the  coast  of  Newfoundland  as  British  fisher- 
men shall  use  (but  not  to  dry  or  cure  the  same  on  that  island),  and  also 
on  the  coasts,  bays,  and  creeks,  of  all  other  of  his  Britannic  Majesty's 
dominions  in  America  ;  and  that  the  American  fishermen  shall  have  liberty 
to  dry  and  cure  fish  in  any  of  the  unsettled  bays,  harbors,  and  creeks  of  Nova 
Scotia,  Magdalen  Islands,  and  Labrador,  so  long  as  the  same  shall  remain 
unsettled  ;  but  so  soon  as  the  same  or  either  of  them  shall  be  settled,  it 
shall  not  be  lawful  for  the  said  fishermen  to  dry  or  cure  fish  at  such  settle- 
ment, without  a  previous  agreement  for  that  purpose  with  the  inhabitants, 
proprietors,  or  possessors  of  the  ground."  The  British  Commissioners, 
assuming  that  these  liberties  had  expired  by  the  war  between  the  two 
countries,  at  an  early  period  of  the  negotiation  declared  that  they  would 
not  be  revived  without  an  equivalent.  Whether  the  treaty  of  1*783  does 
not  form  an  exception  to  the  general  rule,  according  to  which  treaties  are 
vacated  by  a  war  breaking  out  between  the  parties,  is  a  question  on  which 
he  did  not  mean  to  express  an  opinion.  The  first  article  of  that  treaty,  by 
which  the  King  of  Great  Britain  acknowledges  the  sovereignty  of  the 
United  States,  certainly  was  not  abrogated  by  the  war  ;  that  all  the  other 
parts  of  the  same  instrument,  which  define  the  limits,  privileges,  and 
liberties  attaching  to  that  sovereignty,  were  equally  unaffected  by  the  war, 
might  be  contended  for  with  at  least  much  plausibility.  If  we  determined 
to  offer  them  the  equivalent  required,  the  question  was,  what  should  it  be? 
When  the  British  Commissioners  demanded,  in  their  projet,  a  renewal  to 
Great  Britain  of  the  right  to  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi,  secured  by 
the  treaty  of  1783,  a  bare  majority  of  the  American  Commissioners  offered 
to  renew  it,  upon  the  condition  that  the  liberties  in  question  were  renewed 
to  us.  He  was  not  one  of  that  majority.  He  would  not  trouble  the  com- 
mittee with  his  reasons  for  being  opposed  to  the  offer.  A  majority  of  his 
colleagues,  actuated  he  believed  by  the  best  motives,  made,  however,  the 
offer,  and  it  was  refused  by  the  British  Commissioners. 


ON    THE    DIRECT    TAX.  87 

If  the  British  interpretation  of  the  treaty  of  1783  be  correct,  we  have 
lost  the  liberties  in  question.  What  the  value  of  them  really  is,  he  had 
not  been  able  to  meet  with  any  two  gentlemen  who  agreed.  The  great 
value  of  the  whole  mass  of  our  fishery  interests,  as  connected  with  our 
navigation  and  trade,  was  sufficiently  demonstrated  by  the  tonnage  em- 
ployed ;  but  of  what  was  the  relative  importance  of  these  liberties,  there 
was  great  contrariety  of  statements.  They  were  liberties  to  be  exercised 
within  a  foreign  jurisdiction,  and  some  of  them  were  liable  to  be  destroyed 
by  the  contingency  of  settlement.  He  did  not  believe,  that  much  import- 
ance attached  to  such  liberties.  Aud,  supposing  them  to  be  lost,  we  are, 
perhaps,  sufficiently  indemnified  by  the  redemption  of  the  British  mort- 
gage upon  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi.  This  great  stream,  on  that 
supposition,  is  placed  where  it  ought  to  be,  in  the  same  independent  con- 
dition with  the  Hudson,  or  any  other  river  in  the  United  States. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  the  opposite  construction  of  the  treaty  of  1783  be 
the  true  one,  these  liberties  remain  to  us,  and  the  right  to  the  naviga- 
tion of  the  Mississippi,  as  secured  to  Great  Britain  by  that  instrument, 
continues  with  her. 

But  he  was  surprised  to  hear  a  gentleman  from  the  western  country 
(Mr.  Hardin)  exclaim,  that  we  had  gained  nothing  by  the  war.  Great 
Britain  acquired,  by  the  treaty  negotiated  by  Mr.  Jay,  the  right  to  trade 
with  the  Indians  within  our  territories.  It  was  a  right  upon  which 
she  placed  great  value,  and  from  the  pursuit  of  which  she  did  not  desist 
without  great  reluctance.  It  had  been  exercised  by  her  agents  in  a 
manner  to  excite  the  greatest  sensibility  in  the  western  country.  This 
right  was  clearly  lost  by  the  war ;  for,  whatever  may  be  the  true  opinion 
as  to  the  treaty  of  1783,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  stipulations  of  that 
of  1794  no  lono-er  exist. 

It  had  been  said,  that  the  great  object  in  the  continuation  of  the  war, 
had  been  to  secure  our  mariners  against  impressment,  and  that  peace  was 
made  without  accomplishing  it.  With  regard  to  the  opposition,  he  pre- 
sumed that  they  would  not  urge  any  such  argument.  For,  if  their  opinion 
was  to  be  inferred  (though  he  hoped  in  this  case  it  was  not)  from  that  of 
an  influential  and  distinguished  member  of  the  opposition,  we  had  reason 
to  believe  that  thev  did  not  think  the  British  doctrines  wronff  on  this 
subject.  He  alluded  to  a  letter  said  to  be  written  by  a  gentleman  of 
great  consideration,  residing  in  an  adjoining  State,  to  a  member  of  this 
House,  in  which  the  writer  states  that  he  conceives  the  British  claim  to 
be  right,  and  expresses  his  hope  that  the  president,  however  he  might 
kick  at  it,  would  be  compelled  to  swallow  the  bitter  pill.  If  the  peace 
had  really  given  up  the  American  doctrine,  it  would  have  been,  according 
to  that  opinion,  merely  yielding  to  the  force  of  the  British  right.  In  that 
view  of  the  subject,  the  error  of  the  administration  would  have  been  in 
contending  for  too  much  in  behalf  of  this  country;  for  he  presumed 
there  was  no  doubt  that,  whether  right  or  wrong,  it  would  be  an  important 


88  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAT. 

principle  gained  to  secure  our  seamen  against  British  impressment.  And 
he  trusted  iti  God  that  all  future  administrations  would  rather  err  on  the 
side  of  contending  for  too  much  than  too  little  for  America. 

But  he  was  willing  to  admit,  that  the  conduct  of  the  administration 
ought  to  be  tried  by  their  own  opinions,  and  not  those  of  the  opposition. 
One  of  the  great  causes  of  the  war,  and  of  its  continuance,  was  the  prac- 
tice of  impressment  exercised  by  Great  Britain,  and  if  this  claim  has  been 
admitted,  by  necessary  implication  or  express  stipulation,  the  administra- 
tion has  abandoned  the  rights  of  our  seamen.  It  was  with  utter  aston- 
ishment that  he  heard  that  it  had  been  contended  in  this  country,  that 
because  our  right  of  exemption  from  the  practice  had  not  been  expressly 
secured  in  the  treaty,  it  was  therefore  given  up !  It  was  impossible  that 
such  an  argument  could  be  advanced  on  the  floor.  No  member  who  re- 
garded his  reputation  would  have  dared  advance  such  an  argument  here. 

Had  the  war  terminated,  the  practice  continuing,  he  admitted  that  such 
might  be  a  fair  inference ;  and  on  some  former  occasion  he  had  laid  down 
the  principle,  which  he  thought  correct,  that  if  the  United  States  did  not 
make  peace  with  Great  Britain,  the  war  in  Europe  continuing,  and  there- 
fore she  continuing  the  exercise  of  the  practice,  without  any  stipulation  to 
secure  us  against  its  effects,  the  plain  inference  would  be,  that  we  had  sur- 
rendered the  right.     But  what  is  the  fact  ?     At  the  time  of  the  conclusion 
of  the  treaty  of  peace,  Great  Britain  had  ceased  the  practice  of  impress- 
ment ;  she  was  not  only  at  peace  with  all  the  powers  of  Europe,  but  there 
was  every  prospect  of  a  permanent  and  durable  peace.     The  treaty  being 
silent  on  the  subject  of  impressment,  the  only  plain  rational  result  was, 
that  neither  party  had  conceded  its  rights,  but  they  were  left  totally  un- 
affected by  it.     He  recollected  to  have  heard  in  the  British  House  of  Com- 
mons, while  he  was  in  Europe,  the  very  reverse  of  the  doctrine  advanced 
here  on  this  subject.     The  British  ministry  were  charged  by  a  member  of 
the  opposition  with  having  surrendered  their  right  of  impressment,  and 
the  same  course  of  reasoning  was  employed  to  prove  it,  as,  he  understood, 
was  employed  in  this  country  to  prove  our  acquiescence  in  that  practice. 
The  argument  was  this  :  the  war  was  made  on  the  professed  ground  of 
resistance  of  the  practice  of  impressment ;  the  peace  having  been  made 
without  a  recognition  of  the  right  of  America,  the  treaty  being  silent  on 
the  subject,  the  inference  was  that  the  British  authorities  had  surrendered 
the  right — that  they  had  failed  to  secure  it,  and,  having  done  so,  had  in 
effect  yielded  it.     The  member  of  the   opposition  in  England  was  just  as 
wrong  as  any  member  of  this  House  would  be,  who  should  contend  that 
the  right  of  impressment  is  surrendered  to  the  British  government.     The 
fact  was,  neither  party  had  surrendered  its  rights  ;  things  remain  as  though 
the  war  had  never  been  made — both  parties  are  in  possession   of  all  the 
rights  they  had  anterior  to  the  war.     Lest  it  might  be  deduced  that  his 
sentiments  on  the  subject  of  impressment  had  undergone  a  change,  he  took 
the  opportunity  to  say,  that,  although  he  desired  to  preserve  peace  between 


ON    THE    DIRECT    TAX.  89 

Great  Britain  and  the  United  States,  and  to  maintain  between  them  that 
good  understanding  calculated  to  promote  the  interest  of  each,  yet,  when- 
ever Great  Britain  should  give  satisfactory  evidence  of  her  design  to  ap- 
ply her  doctrine  of  impressment  as  heretofore,  he  was,  for  one,  ready  to 
take  up  arms  again  to  oppose  her.  The  fact  was,  that  the  two  nations 
had  been  placed  in  a  state  of  hostility  as  to  a  practice  growing  out  of 
the  war  in  Europe.  The  war  ceasing  between  Great  Britain  and  the  rest 
of  Europe,  left  England  and  America  engaged  in  a  contest  on  an  aggres- 
sion which  had  also  practically  ceased.  The  question  had  then  presented 
itself,  whether  the  United  States  should  be  kept  in  war,  to  gain  an  aban- 
donment of  what  had  become  a  mere  abstract  principle;  or,  looking  at 
the  results,  and  relying  on  the  good  sense  and  sound  discretion  of  both 
countries,  we  should  not  recommend  the  termination  of  the  war.  When 
no  practical  evil  could  result  from  the  suspension  of  hostilities,  aud  there 
was  no  more  than  a  possibility  of  the  renewal  of  the  practice  of  Impress- 
ment, I,  as  one  of  the  mission,  consented  with  sincere  pleasure  to  the 
peace,  satisfied  that  we  gave  up  no  right,  sacrificed  no  honor,  compromitted 
no  important  principle.  He  said,  then,  applying  the  rule  of  the  actual 
state  of  things,  as  that  by  which  to  judge  of  the  peace,  there  was  nothing 
in  the  conditions  or  terms  of  the  peace  that  was  dishonorable,  nothing  for 
reproach,  nothing  for  regret. 

Geutlemeu  have  complained  that  we  had  lost  the  islands  in  the  bay  of 
Passamaquoddy.  Have  they  examined  into  that  question,  and  do  they 
know  the  grounds  on  which  it  stands  ?  Prior  to  the  war  we  occupied 
Moose  Island,  the  British,  Grand  Meuan.  Each  party  claimed  both  islands ; 
America,  because  they  are  within  the  limits  of  the  United  States,  as  defined 
by  the  treaty  of  1783  ;  and  Great  Britain,  because,  as  she  alleges,  they 
were  in  the  exception  contained  in  the  second  article  of  that  treaty  as  to 
islands  within  the  limits  of  the  province  of  Nova  Scotia.  All  the  infor- 
mation which  he  had  received  concurred  in  representing  Grand  Meuan  as 
the  most  valuable  island.  Does  the  treaty,  in  stipulating  for  an  amicable 
and  equitable  mode  of  settling  this  controversy,  yield  one  foot  of  the  ter- 
ritory of  the  United  States  ?  If  our  title  to  Moose  Island  is  drawn  in 
question,  that  of  Great  Britain  to  Grand  Menan  is  equally  so.  If  we  may 
lose  the  one,  she  may  the  other.  The  treaty,  it  was  true,  contained  a  pro- 
vision that  the  party  in  possession,  at  the  time  of  its  ratification,  may  hold 
on  until  the  question  of  right  is  decided.  The  committee  would  observe, 
that  this  stipulation,  as  to  possession,  was  not  limited  to  the  moment  of 
the  signature,  but  looked  to  the  period  of  the  ratification  of  the  treaty. 
The  American  Commissioners  had  thought  they  might  safely  rely  on  the 
valor  of  Massachusetts,  or  the  arms  of  the  United  States,  to  drive  the  in- 
vader from  our  soil ;  aud  had  also  hoped  that  we  might  obtain  possession 
of  Grand  Menan.  It  is  true,  they  have  been  disappointed  in  the  successful 
application  of  the  force  of  that  State  and  of  that  of  the  Union.  But  it  is  not 
true  that  we  have  parted  with  the  right.     It  is  fair  to  presume  that  Great 


90  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

Britain  will,  with  good  faith,  co-operate  in  carrying  the  stipulations  into 
effect ;  and  she  has,  in  fact,  already  promptly  proceeded  to  the  appointment 
of  commissioners  under  the  treaty. 

What  have  we  gained  by  the  war  ?  He  had  shown  we  had  lost  nothing 
in  rights,  territory,  or  honor ;  nothing  for  which  we  ought  to  have  con- 
tended, according  to  the  principles  of  the  gentlemen  on  the  other  side,  or 
according  to  our  own.  Have  we  gained  nothing  by  the  war  ?  Let  any 
man  look  at  the  degraded  condition  of  this  country  before  the  war — the 
scorn  of  the  universe,  the  contempt  of  ourselves — and  tell  me,  if  we  have 
gained  nothing  by  the  war  ?  What  is  our  present  situation  ?  Respectabil- 
ity and  character  abroad ;  security  and  confidence  at  home.  If  we  have 
not  obtained,  in  the  opinion  of  some,  the  full  measure  of  retribution,  our 
character  and  Constitution  are  placed  on  a  solid  basis,  never  to  be  shaken. 
The  glory  acquired  by  our  gallant  tars,  by  our  Jacksons  and  our  Browns  on 
the  land,  is  that  nothing  ?  True,  we  have  had  our  vicissitudes — that  there 
were  humiliating  events  which  the  patriot  could  not  review  without 
deep  regret.  But  the  great  account,  when  it  came  to  be  balanced, 
thank  God,  would  be  found  vastly  in  our  favor.  Is  there  a  man,  he 
asked,  who  would  have  obliterated  from  the  pages  of  our  history  the 
brilliant  achievements  of  Jackson,  Brown,  Scott,  and  the  host  of  heroes 
on  land  and  sea  whom  he  would  not  enumerate  ?  Is  there  a  man  who 
could  not  desire  a  participation  in  the  national  glory  acquired  by  the 
war  2 — yes,  national  glory ;  which,  however  the  expression  may  be  con- 
demned by  some,  must  be  cherished  by  every  genuine  patriot.  What 
do  I  mean  by  national  glory  ?  Glory  such  as  Hull,  of  the  Constitution. 
Jackson,  Lawrence,  Perry,  have  acquired.  And  are  gentlemen  insensible 
to  their  deeds  ?  to  the  value  of  them,  in  animating  the  country  in  the 
hour  of  peril  hereafter  1  Did  the  battle  of  Thermopylae  preserve  Greece 
but  once  ?  While  the  Mississippi  continues  to  bear  the  tributes  of  the  Iron 
mountains,  and  the  Alleghany  to  her  delta  and  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  the 
8th  of  January  shall  be  remembered,  and  the  glory  of  that  day  shall 
stimulate  future  patriots,  and  nerve  the  arms  of  unborn  freemen,  in  driving 
the  presumptuous  invader  from  our  country's  soil.  Gentlemen  may  boast 
of  their  insensibility  to  feelings  inspired  by  the  contemplation  of  such 
events.  But  he  would  ask,  does  the  recollection  of  Bunker's  hill,  of  Sar- 
atoga, of  Yorktown,  afford  them  no  pleasure  ?  Every  act  of  noble  sacri- 
fice to  the  country — every  instance  of  patriotic  devotion  to  her  cause — has 
its  beneficial  influence.  A  nation's  character  is  the  sum  of  its  splendid 
deeds.  They  constitute  one  common  patrimony — the  nation's  inheritance. 
They  awe  foreign  powers.  They  arouse  and  animate  our  own  people.  Do 
gentlemen  derive  no  pleasure  from  the  recent  transactions  in  the  Mediterra- 
nean ?  Can  they  regard  unmoved  the  honorable  issue  of  a  war,  in  sup- 
port of  our  national  rights,  declared,  prosecuted,  and  determined  by  a 
treaty  in  which  the  enemy  submitted  to  a  carte-blanche,  in  the  short  period 
of  forty  days  ?     The  days  of  chivalry  are  not  gone.     They  have  been  re- 


ON    THE    DIRECT    TAX.  91 

vived  in  tbe  person  of  Commodore  Decatur,  who,  in  releasing  from  infidel 
bondage  Christian  captives — the  subjects  of  a  foreign  power — and  restor- 
ing them  to  their  country  and  their  friends,  has  placed  himself  beside  the 
most  renowned  knights  of  former  times.  I  love  true  glory.  It  is  this 
sentiment  which  ought  to  be  cherished ;  and  in  spite  of  cavils  and  sneers 
and  attempts  to  put  it  down,  it  will  finally  conduct  this  nation  to  that 
height  to  which  God  aud  nature  have  destined  it.  Three  wars,  those  who 
at  the  present  administer  this  government  may  say,  and  say  with  proud 
satisfaction,  they  have  safely  conducted  us  through.  Two  with  powers, 
which,  though  otherwise  contemptible,  have  laid  almost  all  Europe  under 
tribute — a  tribute  from  which  we  are  exonerated.  The  third,  with  one  of 
the  most  gigantic  powers  that  the  world  ever  saw.  These  struggles  have 
not  been  without  their  sacrifices,  nor  without  their  lessons.  They  have 
created,  or  rather  greatly  increased,  the  public  debt.  They  have  thought, 
that,  to  preserve  the  character  we  have  established,  preparation  for  war  is 
necessary. 

The  public  debt  exists.  However  contracted,  tbe  faith  of  the  nation  is 
pledged  for  its  redemption.  It  can  only  be  paid  by  providing  an  excess 
of  revenue  beyond  expenditure,  or  by  retrenchment.  Did  gentlemen  con- 
tend that  the  results  of  the  report  were  inaccurate — that  the  proceeds  of 
the  revenue  would  be  greater,  or  the  public  expense  less  than  the  estimate? 
On  these  subjects  he  believed  it  would  be  presumption  in  him,  wdi^n  the 
defense  of  the  report  was  in  such  able  hands  (Mr.  Lowndes's),  to  attempt 
its  vindication.  Leaving  the  task  to  that  gentleman,  he  should  assume, 
for  the  present,  its  accuracy .jf  He  would  lay  down  a  general  rule,  from 
which  there  ought  never  to  De  a  departure  without  absolute  necessity — 
that  the  expenses  of  the  year  ought  to  be  met  by  the  revenue  of  the 
year.  If  in  time  of  war  it  were  impossible  to  observe  this  rule,  we 
ought,  in  time  of  peace,  to  provide  for  as  speedy  a  discharge  of  the  debt 
contracted  in  the  preceding  war  as  possible.  \  This  can  only  be  done  by 
an  effective  sinking-fund,  based  upon  an  excess  of  revenue  beyond  ex- 
penditure, and  a  protraction  of  the  period  of  peace.  If  in  England  the 
sinking-fund  had  not  fulfilled  what  was  promised,  it  was  because  of  a  fail- 
ure to  provide  such  a  revenue,  and  because  tbe  intervals  of  peace  in  that 
countiy  had  been  too  few  and  too  short.  From  the  Revolution  to  1812,  a 
period  of  one  hundred  and  twenty-four  years,  there  had  been  sixty-three 
years  of  war,  and  only  sixty-one  of  peace  ;  and  there  had  been  contracted 
£638,129,577  of  debt,  and  discharged  only  £39,594,305.  The  national 
debt  at  the  peace  of  Utretcht  amounted  to  £52,681,076,  and  during  the 
peace  which  followed,  being  about  twenty-seven  years,  from  1714  to  1740, 
there  was  discharged  only  £7,231,503.  When  the  operations  of  our  sink- 
ing-fund were  contrasted  with  those  of  Great  Britain,  they  would  be 
found  to  present  the  most  gratifying  results.  Our  public  debt,  existing  on 
the  1st  day  of  January,  1802,  amounted  to  $78,754,568,  70  ;  and  on  the  1st 
of  January,  1815,  we  had  extinguished  §33,873,463  98.     Thus  in  thirteen 


92  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

years,  one  half  the  period  of  peace  that  followed  the  treaty  of  Utrecht,  we 
had  discharged  rnore  public  debt  than  Great  Britain  did  during  that  period. 
In  twenty-six  years  she  did  not  pay  much  more  than  a  seventh  of  her  debt. 
In  thirteen  years  we  paid  more  than  a  third  of  ours.  If,  then,  a  public 
debt,  contracted  in  a  manner,  he  trusted,  satisfactory  to  the  country,  im- 
posed upon  us  a  duty  to  provide  for  its  payment ;  if  we  were  encouraged, 
by  past  experience,  to  persevere  in  the  application  of  an  effective  sinking- 
fund,  he  would  again  repeat,  that  the  only  alternatives  were  the  adoption 
of  a  system  of  taxation  producing  the  revenue  estimated  by  the  Committee 
of  Ways  and  Means,  or  by  great  retrenchment  of  the  public  expenses. 

In  what  respect  can  a  reduction  of  the  public  expenses  be  effected  ? 
Gentlemen  who  assailed  the  report  on  this  ground  have,  by  the  in- 
definite nature  of  the  attack,  great  advantage  on  their  side.  Instead  of 
contenting  themselves  with  crying  out  retrenchment !  retrenchment !  a 
theme  always  plausible,  an  object  always  proper  when  the  public  interest 
will  admit  of  it,  let  them  point  the  attention  of  the  House  to  some  speci- 
fied subject.  If  they  really  think  a  reduction  of  the  army  and  navy,  or 
either  of  them,  be  proper,  let  them  lay  a  resolution  upon  the  table  to  that 
effect.  They  had  generally,  it  is  true,  singled  out,  in  discussing  this  re- 
port (and  he  had  no  objection  to  meet  them  in  this  way,  though  he  thought 
the  other  the  fairest  course),  the  military  establishment.  He  was  glad 
that  the  navy  had  fought  itself  into  favor,  and  that  no  one  appeared  dis- 
posed to  move  its  reduction  or  to  oppose  its  gradual  augmentation.  But 
the  "standing  army"  is  the  great  object  of  gentlemen's  apprehensions. 
And  those  who  can  bravely  set  at  defiance  hobgoblins,  the  creatures  of  their 
own  fertile  imaginations,  are  trembling  for  the  liberties  of  the  people  en- 
dangered by  a  standing  army  of  ten  thousand  men.  Those  who  can 
courageously  vote  against  taxes  are  alarmed  for  the  safety  of  the  Constitu- 
tion and  the  country  at  such  a  force  scattered  over  our  extensive  territory ! 
This  could  not  have  been  expected,  at  least  in  the  honorable  gentleman 
(Mr.  Ross),  who,  if  he  had  been  storming  a  fort,  could  not  have  displayed 
more  cool,  collected  courage  than  he  did,  when  he  declared  that  he  would 
show  to  Pennsylvania  that  she  had  one  faithful  representative  bold  and 
independent  enough  to  vote  against  a  tax ! 

He  had  happened,  very  incidentally,  the  other  day,  and  in  a  manner 
which  he  had  supposed  could  not  attract  particular  attention,  to  state,  that 
the  general  condition  of  the  world  admonished  us  to  shape  our  measures 
with  a  view  to  the  possible  conflicts  into  which  we  might  be  drawn  ;  and 
he  said,  he  did  not  know  when  he  should  cease  of  witness  the  attacks 
made  upon  him  in  consequence  of  that  general  remark ;  when  he  should 
cease  to  hear  the  cry  of  "  standing  army,"  "  national  glory,"  etc.,  etc. 
From  the  tenor  of  gentlemen's  observations,  it  would  seem  as  if,  for  the 
first  time  in  the  history  of  this  government,  it  was  now  proposed,  that  a 
certain  reo-ular  force  should  constitute  a  portion  of  the  public  defense. 
But  from  the  administration  of  General  Washington,  down  to  this  time, 


ON    THE    DIRECT    TAX.  93 

a  regular  force,  a  standing  army  (if  gentlemen  please),  had  existed,  and 
the  only  question  about  it,  at  any  time,  had  been,  what  should  be  the 
amount.  Gentlemen  themselves,  who  most  loudly  decry  this  establish- 
ment, did  not  propose  an  entire  disbandment  of  it ;  and  the  question,  ever 
with  them  is,  not  whether  a  regular  force  be  necessary,  but  whether  a 
regular  force  of  this  or  that  amount  be  called  for  by  the  actual  state 
of  our  affairs. 

The  question  is  not,  on  any  side  of  the  House,  as  to  the  nature,  but 
the  quantum  of  the  force.  He  maintained  the  position,  that  if  there  was  the 
most  profound  peace  that  ever  existed,  if  we  had  no  fears  from  any  quarter 
whatever,  if  all  the  world  was  in  a  state  of  the  most  profound  and  absolute 
repose,  a  regular  force  of  ten  thousand  men  was  not  too  great  for  the 
purposes  of  this  government.  We  knew  too  much,  he  said,  of  the  vicis- 
situdes of  human  affairs,  and  the  uncertainty  of  all  our  calculations,  not 
to  know  that  even  in  the  most  profound  tranquillity,  some  tempest  may 
suddenly  arise,  and  bring  us  into  a  state  requiring  the  exertion  of  military 
force,  which  can  not  be  created  in  a  moment,  but  requires  time  for  its  col- 
lection, organization,  and  discipline.  When  gentlemen  talked  of  the  force 
which  was  deemed  sufficient  some  twenty  years  ago,  what  did  they  mean  ? 
That  this  force  was  not  to  be  progressive  ?  That  the  full-grown  man 
ought  to  wear  the  clothes  and  habits  of  his  infancy  ?  That  the  establish- 
ment maintained  by  this  government,  when  its  population  amounted  to  four 
or  five  millions  only,  should  be  the  standard  by  which  our  measures  should 
be  regulated,  in  all  subsequent  states  of  the  country  ?  If  gentlemen  meant 
this,  as  it  seemed  to  him  they  did,  he  and  they  should  not  agree.  He  con- 
tended that  establishments  ought  to  be  commraensurate  with  the  actual 
state  of  the  country,  should  grow  with  its  growth,  and  keep  pace  with  its 
progress.  Look  at  that  map  (said  he,  pointing  to  the  large  map  of  the 
United  States,  which  hangs  in  the  hall  of  Representatives) — at  the  vast 
extent  of  that  country  which  stretches  from  the  Lake  of  the  Woods,  in 
the  north-west,  to  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  in  the  east.  Look  at  the  vast  extent 
of  our  maritime  coast ;  recollect  we  have  Indians  and  powerful  nations 
coterminous  on  the  whole  frontier ;  and  that  we  know  not  at  what  mo- 
ment the  savage  enemy,  or  Great  Britain  herself,  may  seek  to  make  war 
with  us.  Ought  the  force  of  the  country  to  be  graduated  by  the  scale 
of  our  exposure,  or  are  we  to  be  uninfluenced  by  the  increase  of  our  lia- 
bility to  war  ?  Have  we  forgotten  that  the  power  of  France,  as  a  coun- 
terpoise to  that  of  Great  Britain,  is  annihilated — gone,  never  to  rise  again, 
I  believe,  under  the  weak,  unhappy,  and  imbecile  race  who  now  sway  her 
destinies?  Any  individual  must,  I  think,  come  to  the  same  conclusion 
with  myself,  who  takes  these  considerations  into  view,  and  reflects  on  our 
growth,  the  state  of  our  defenses,  the  situation  of  the  nations  of  the  world, 
and  above  all,  of  that  nation  with  whom  we  are  most  likely  to  come  into 
collision  ;  for  it  is  in  vain  to  conceal  it :  this  country  must  have  many  a 
hard  and  desperate   tug  with  Great  Britain,  let  the  two  governments  be 


94  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

administered  how  and  by  whom  they  may.  That  man  must  be  blind  to 
the  indications  of  the  future,  who  can  not  see  that  we  are  destined  to  have 
war  after  war  with  Great  Britain,  until,  if  one  of  the  two  nations  be  not 
crushed,  all  grounds  of  collision  shall  have  ceased  between  us.  I  repeat, 
if  the  condition  of  France  were  that  of  perfect  repose,  instead  of  that  of 
a  volcano,  ready  to  burst  out  again  with  a  desolating  eruption ;  if  with 
Spain  our  differences  were  settled ;  if  the  dreadful  war  raging  in  South 
America  were  terminated ;  if  the  marines  of  all  the  powers  of  Europe  were 
resuscitated  as  they  stood  prior  to  the  revolution  of  France ;  if  there  was 
universal  repose,  and  profound  tranquillity  among  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth  ;  considering  the  actual  growth  of  our  country,  in  my  judgment,  the 
force  of  ten  thousand  men  would  not  be  too  great  for  its  exigences.  Do 
gentlemen  ask,  if  I  rely  on  the  regular  force  entirely  for  the  defense  of  the 
country  ?  I  answer,  it  is  for  garrisoning  and  keeping  in  order  our  forti- 
fications, for  the  preservation  of  the  national  arms,  for  something  like  a  safe 
depository  of  military  science  and  skill,  to  which  we  may  recur  in  time  of 
danger,  that  I  desire  to  maintain  an  adequate  regular  force.  I  know  that 
in  the  hour  of  peril,  our  great  reliance  must  be  on  the  whole  physical  force 
of  the  country,  and  that  no  detachment  of  it  can  be  exclusively  depended 
on.  History  proves  that  no  nation,  not  destitute  of  the  military  art,  whose 
people  were  united  in  its  defense,  ever  was  conquered.  It  is  true,  that  in 
countries  where  standing  armies  have  been  entirely  relied  on,  the  armies 
have  been  subdued,  and  the  subjugation  of  the  nation  has  been  the  con- 
sequence of  it ;  but  no  example  is  to  be  found  of  a  united  people  being 
conquered,  who  possessed  an  adequate  degree  of  military  knowledge. 
Look  at  the  Grecian  republics,  struggling  successfully  against  the  over- 
whelming force  of  Persia  ;  look  more  recently  at  Spain.  I  have  great 
confidence  in  the  militia,  and  I  would  go  with  my  honorable  colleague 
(Mr.  M'Kee),  whose  views  I  know  are  honest,  hand  in  hand,  in  arming, 
disciplining,  and  rendering  effective,  the  militia.  I  am  for  providing  the 
nation  with  every  possible  means  of  resistance.  I  ask  my  honorable  col- 
league, after  I  have  gone  thus  far  with  him,  to  go  a  step  further  with  me, 
and  let  us  retain  the  force  we  now  have  for  the  purposes  I  have  already 
described.  I  ask  gentlemen  who  propose  to  reduce  the  army,  if  they  have 
examined  in  detail  the  number  and  extent  of  the  posts  and  garrisons  on 
our  maritime  and  interior  frontier  ?  If  they  have  not  gone  through  this 
process  of  reasoning,  how  shall  we  arrive  at  the  result  that  we  can  reduce 
the  army  with  safety  ?  There  is  not  one  of  our  forts  adequately  gar- 
risoned at  this  moment ;  and  there  is  nearly  one  fourth  of  them  that  have 
not  one  solitary  man.  I  said  the  other  day  that  I  would  rather  vote  for 
the  augmentation  than  the  reduction  of  the  army.  When  returning  to 
my  country  from  its  foreign  service,  and  looking  at  this  question,  it  ap- 
peared to  me  that  the  maximum  was  twenty  thousand,  the  minimum  ten 
thousand  of  the  force  we  ought  to  retain.  And  I  again  say,  that  rather 
than  reduce  I  would  vote  to  increase  the  present  force. 


ON   THE   DIRECT   TAX.  95 

A  standing  army  had  been  deemed  necessary  from  the  commencement 
of  the  government  to  the  present  time.     The  question  was  only  as  to  the 
quantum  of  force,  and  not  whether  it  should  exist.     No  man  who  regards 
his  political  reputation  would  place  himself  before  the  people  on  a  proposi- 
tion for  its  absolute  disbandment.     He  admitted  a  question  as  to  quantum 
mio-ht  be  carried  so  far  as  to  rise  into  a  question  of  principle.     If  we  were 
to  propose  to  retain  an   army  of  thirty,  or  forty,  or  fifty  thousand  men, 
then  truly  the  question  would  present  itself,  whether  our  rights  were  not 
in  some  danger  from  such  a  standing  army  ;  whether  reliance  was  to  be 
placed  altogether  on  a  standing  army,  or  on   that  natural  safe  defense 
which,  according  to  the  habits  of  the  country  and  the  principles  of  our 
government,  is  considered  the  bulwark  of  our  liberties.     But  between  five 
and  ten  thousand  men,  or  any  number  under  ten  thousand,  it  could  not  be 
a  question  of  principle  ;  for  unless  gentlemeu  were  afraid   of  specters,  it 
was  utterly  impossible  that  any  danger  could   be  apprehended  from  ten 
thousand  men  dispersed  on  a  frontier  of  many  thousand  miles  ;  here  twenty 
or  thirty,  there  a  hundred,  and  the  largest  amount,  at  Detroit,  not  exceed- 
ing a  thin  regiment.     And  yet,  brave  gentlemen — gentlemen  who  are  not 
alarmed  at  hobgoblins — who  can  intrepidly  vote  even  against  taxes — are 
alarmed  by  a  force  of  this  extent !     What,  he  asked,  was  the  amount  of 
the  army  in  the  time  of  Mr.  Jefferson — a  time,  the  orthodoxy  of  which 
had  been  so  ostentatiously  proclaimed  ?     It  was  true  when  that  gentleman 
came  into  power  it  was  with  a  determination  to  retrench,  as  far  as  practic- 
able.    Under  the  full  influence  of  these  notions,  in  1802,  the  bold  step  of 
wholly  disbanding  the  army  never  was  thought  of.     The  military  peace 
establishment  was  then  fixed  at  about  four  thousand  men.    But,  before  Mr. 
Jefferson  went  out  of  power,  what  was  done—that  is,  in  April,  1808  ?     In 
addition  to  the  then  existing  peace  establishment,  eight  regiments,  amount- 
ing to  between  five  and  six  thousand  men,  were  authorized,  making  a  total 
force  precisely  equal  to  the  present  peace  establishment.     It  was  true  that 
all  this  force  had  never  been  actually  enlisted  and  embodied ;  that  the  re- 
cruiting service  had  been  suspended ;  and  that  at  the  commencement  of 
the  war  we  had  far  from  this  number ;  and  we  have  not  now  actually  ten 
thousand   men — being  at  least  two  thousand  deficient  of  that  number. 
He  adverted  to  what  had  been  said  on  this  and  other  occasions  of  Mr. 
Jefferson's  not  having  seized  the  favorable  moment  for  war,  which  was  af- 
forded by  the  attack  on  the  Chesapeake.     He  had  always  entertained  the 
opinion,  he  said,  that  Mr.  Jefferson,  on  that  occasion,  took  the  correct, 
manly,  and  frank  course,  in  saying  to  the  British  government,  your  officers 
have  done  this;  it  is  an  enormous  aggression;  do  you  approve  the  act? 
do  you  make  it  your  cause,  or  not  ?     That  government  did  not  sanction 
the  act ;  it  disclaimed  it,  and  promptly,  too ;  and  although  they,  for  a 
long  time,  withheld  the  due  redress,  it  was  ultimately  tendered.     If  Mr. 
Jefferson  had  used  his  power  to  carry  the  country  into  a  war  at  that  period, 
it  might  have  been  supported  by  public  opinion,  during  the  moment  of 


96  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY   CLAY. 

fever,  but  it  would  soon  abate,  and  the  people  would  begin  to  ask,  why 
this  war  had  been  made  without  understanding  whether  the  British  gov- 
ernment avowed  the  conduct  of  its  officers,  and  so  forth.  If  the  threaten- 
ing aspect  of  our  relations  with  England  had  entered  into  the  considera- 
tion which  had  caused  the  increase  of  the  army  at  that  time,  there  were 
considerations  equally  strong  at  this  time,  with  our  augmented  population, 
for  retaining  our  present  force.  If,  however,  there  were  no  threateninga 
from  any  quarter ;  if  the  relative  force  of  European  nations,  and  the  gen- 
eral balance  of  power  existing  before  the  French  Revolution  were  restored  ; 
if  South  America  had  not  made  the  attempt,  in  which  he  trusted  in  God 
she  would  succeed,  to  achieve  her  independence  ;  if  our  affairs  with  Spain 
were  settled,  he  would  repeat,  that  ten  thousand  men  would  not  be  too 
great  a  force  for  the  necessities  of  the  country,  and  with  a  view  to  fu- 
ture emergences. 

He  had  taken  the  liberty,  the  other  day,  to  make  some  observations 
which  he  might  now  repeat  as  furnishing  auxiliary  considerations  for 
adopting  a  course  of  prudence  and  precaution.  He  had  then  said,  that  our 
affairs  with  Spain  were  not  settled ;  that  the  Spanish  minister  was  re- 
ported to  have  made  some  inadmissible  demands  of  our  government.  The 
fact  turned  out  as  he  had  presented  it.  It  appeared  that  what  was  then 
rumor  was  now  a  fact ;  and  Spain  had  taken  the  ground,  not  only  that 
there  must  be  a  discussion  of  our  title  to  that  part  of  Louisiana,  formerly 
called  West  Florida  (which  it  might  be  doubted  whether  it  ought  to  take 
place),  but  had  required  that  we  must  surrender  the  territory  first,  and  dis- 
cuss the  right  to  it  afterward.  Besides  this  unsettled  state  of  our  relations 
with  Spain,  he  said,  there  were  other  rumors,  and  he  wished  to  God  we 
had  the  same  means  of  ascertaining  their  correctness  as  we  had  found  of 
ascertaining  the  truth  of  the  rumor  just  noticed  :  it  was  rumored  that  the 
Spanish  province  of  Florida  had  been  ceded,  with  all  her  pretensions,  to 
Great  Britain.  Would  gentlemen  tell  him,  then,  that  this  was  a  time  when 
any  statesman  would  pursue  the  hazardous  policy  of  disarming  entirely,  of 
quietly  smoking  our  pipes  by  our  firesides  regardless  of  impending  dan- 
ger ?  It  might  be  a  palatable  doctrine  to  some,  but  he  was  persuaded 
was  condemned  by  the  rules  of  conduct  in  private  life,  by  those  maxims 
of  sound  precaution  by  which  individuals  would  regulate  their  private  af- 
fairs. He  did  not  here  mean  to  take  up  the  question  in  relation  to  South 
America.  Still  it  was  impossible  not  to  see  that,  in  the  progress  of  things, 
we  might  be  called  on  to  decide  the  question,  whether  we  would  or  would 
not  lend  them  our  aid.  This  opinion  he  boldly  declared,  and  he  enter- 
tained it,  not  in  any  pursuit  of  vain  glory,  but  from  a  deliberate  conviction 
of  its  being  conformable  to  the  best  interests  of  the  country  ;  that  having 
a  proper  understanding  with  foreign  powers — that  understanding  which 
prudence  and  a  just  precaution  recommended — it  would  undoubtedly  be 
good  policy  to  take  part  with  the  patriots  of  South  America.  He  believed 
it  could  be  shown  that,  on  the  strictest  principles  of  public  law,  we  have 


ON    THE    DIRECT    TAX.  97 

a  right  to  take  part  with  them,  that  it  is  to  our  interest  to  take  part  with 
them,  and  that  our  interposition  in  their  favor  would  be  effectual.     But  he 
confessed,  with  infinite  regret,  that  he  saw  a  supineness  on  this  iutf  ..esting 
subject  throughout  our  country,  which  left  him  almost  without  hope  that 
what  he  believed  the  correct  policy  of  the  country  would  be  pursued. 
He  considered  the  release  of  any  part  of  America  from  the  dominion  of 
the  Old  World  as  adding  to  the  general  security  of  the  New.     He  could 
not  contemplate  the  exertions  of  the  people  of  South  America  without  wish- 
ing that  they  might  triumph,  and  nobly  triumph.     He  believed  the  cause 
of  humanity  would  be  promoted  by  the  interposition  of  any  foreign  power 
which  should  terminate  the  contest  between  the  friends  and  enemies  of  in- 
dependence in  that  quarter,  for  a  more  bloody  and  cruel  war  never  had 
been  carried  on  since  the  days  of  Adam,  than  that  which  is  now  raging 
in  South  America ;  in  which  not  the  least  regard  is  paid  to  the  laws  of 
war,  to  the  rights  of  capitulation,  to  the  rights  of  prisoners,  nor  even  to 
the  rights  of  kindred.     I  do  not  offer  these  views  expecting  to  influence 
the  opinions  of  others  ;  they  are  opinions  of  my  own.     But,  on  the  ques- 
tion of  general  policy,  whether  or  not  we  shall  interfere  in  the  war  in 
South  America,  it  may  turn  out  that,  whether  we  will  or  will  not  choose 
to  interfere  in  their  behalf,  we  shall  be  drawn  into  the  contest  in  the 
course  of  its  progress.     Among  other  demands  by  the  minister  of  Spain  is 
the  exclusion  of  the  flag  of  Buenos  Ayres,  and  other  parts  of  South  Amer- 
ica from  our  ports.     Our  government  has  taken  a  ground  on  this  subject, 
of  which  I  think  no  gentleman  can  disapprove — that  all  parties  shall  be 
admitted  and  hospitably  treated  in  our  ports,  provided  they  conform  to  our 
laws  while  among  us.     What  course  Spain  may  take  on  this  subject  it 
was  impossible  now  to  say.     Although  I  would  not  urge  this  as  an  ar- 
gument for  increasing  our  force,  I  would  place  it  among  those  consider- 
ations which  ought  to  have  weight,  with  every  enlightened  mind,  in  de- 
termining upon  the  propriety  of  its  reduction.     It  is  asserted  that  Great 
Britain  has  strengthened  and  is  strengthening  herself  in  the  provinces  adjoin- 
ing us.   Is  this  a  moment  when,  in  prudence,  we  ought  to  disarm  ?  No,  sir. 
Preserve  your  existing  force.     It  would  be  extreme  indiscretion  to  lessen  it. 
Mr.  Clay  here  made  some  observations,  to  show  that  a  reduction  of  the 
army  to  from  four  to  five  thousand  men,  as  had  been  suggested,  would  not 
occasion  such  a  diminution  of  expense  as  to  authorize  the  rejection  of  the 
report,  or  any  essential  alteration  in  the  amount  of  revenue,  which  the  sys- 
tem proposes  to  raise  from  internal  taxes,  and  his  colleague  (Mr.  M'Kee) 
appeared  equally  hostile  to  all  of  them.     Having,  however,  shown  that  we 
can  not  in  safety  reduce  the  army,  he  would  leave  the  details  of  the  report  in 
the  abler  hands  of  the  honorable  chairman  (Mr.  Lowndes),  who,  he  had  no 
doubt,  could  demonstrate,  that  with  all  the  retrenchments  which  had  been 
recommended,  the  government  would  be  bankrupt  in  less  than  three  years, 
if  most  of  these  taxes  were  not  continued.     He  would  now  hasten  to  that 

7 


98  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY   CLAY. 

conclusion,  at  which  the  committee  could  not  regret  more  than  he  did,  that 
he  had  not  lonjy  since  arrived. 

O 

As  to  the  attitude  in  which  this  country  should  be  placed,  the  duty  of 
Congress  could  not  be  mistaken.  My  policy  is  to  preserve  the  present 
force,  naval  and  military  ;  to  provide  for  the  augmentation  of  the  navy  ; 
and,  if  the  danger  of  war  should  increase,  to  increase  the  army  also.  Arm 
the  militia,  and  give  it  the  most  effective  character  of  which  it  is  suscep- 
tible. Provide  in  the  most  ample  manner,  and  place  in  proper  depots,  all 
the  munitions  and  instruments  of  war.  Fortify  and  strengthen  the  weak 
and  vulnerable  points  indicated  by  experience.  Construct  military  roads 
and  canals,  particularly  from  the  Miami  of  the  Ohio  to  the  Miami  of  Erie  ; 
from  the  Sciota  to  the  bay  of  Sandusky  ;  from  the  Hudson  to  Ontario ; 
that  the  facilities  of  transportation  may  exist,  of  the  men  and  means  of 
the  country,  to  points  where  they  may  be  wanted.  I  would  employ  on 
this  subject  a  part  of  the  army,  which  should  also  be  employed  on  our 
line  of  frontier,  territorial  and  maritime,  in  strengthening  the  works  of  de- 
fense. I  would  provide  steam  batteries  for  the  Mississippi,  for  Borgne  and 
Ponchartrain,  and  for  the  Chesapeake,  and  for  any  part  of  the  North  or 
East,  where  they  might  be  beneficially  employed.  In  short,  I  would  act 
seriously,  effectively  act,  on  the  principle,  that  in  peace  we  ought  to  pre- 
pare for  war ;  for  I  repeat,  again  and  again,  that,  in  spite  of  all  the  pru- 
dence exerted  by  the  government,  and  the  forbearance  of  others,  the  hour 
of  trial  will  come.  These  halcyon  days  of  peace,  this  calm  will  yield  to 
the  storm  of  war,  and  when  that  comes,  I  am  for  being  prepared  to  breast 
it.  Has  not  the  government  been  reproached  for  the  want  of  preparation 
at  the  commencement  of  the  late  war  ?  And  yet  the  same  gentlemen  who 
utter  these  reproaches,  instead  of  taking  counsel  from  experience,  would 
leave  the  country  in  an  unprepared  condition. 

He  would  as  earnestly  commence  the  great  work,  too  long  delayed,  of 
internal  improvement.  He  desired  to  see  a  chain  of  turnpike  roads  and 
canals,  from  Passamaquoddy  to  New  Orleans ;  and  other  similar  roads  in- 
tersecting the  mountains,  to  faciliate  intercourse  between  all  parts  of  the 
country,  and  to  bind  and  connect  us  together.  He  would  also  effectually 
protect  our  manufactories.  We  had  given,  at  least,  an  implied  pledge  to 
do  so,  by  the  course  of  administration.  He  would  afford  them  protection, 
not  so  much  for  the  sake  of  the  manufacturers  themselves,  as  for  the  ffen- 
eral  interest.  We  should  thus  have  our  wants  supplied,  when  foreign  re- 
sources are  cut  off,  and  we  should  also  lay  the  basis  of  a  system  of  taxation, 
to  be  resorted  to  when  the  revenue  from  imports  is  stopped  by  war.  Such, 
Mr.  Chairman,  is  a  rapid  sketch  of  the  policy  which  it  seems  to  me  it  be- 
comes us  to  pursue.  It  is  for  you  now  to  decide  whether  we  shall  draw 
wisdom  from  the  past,  or,  neglecting  the  lessons  of  recent  experience,  we 
shall  go  on  headlong  without  foresight,  meriting  and  receiving  the  re- 
proaches of  the  community.  I  trust,  sir,  notwithstanding  the  unpromising 
appearances  sometimes  presenting  themselves,  during  the  present  session, 


ON  THE  DIRECT   TAX.  99 

we  shall  yet  do  our  duty.  I  appeal  to  the  friends  around  me,  with  whom 
I  have  been  associated  for  years  in  public  life  ;  who  nobly,  manfully  vin- 
dicated the  national  character  by  a  war,  waged  by  a  young  people,  unskilled 
in  arms,  single-handed,  against  a  veteran  power — a  war  which  the  nation 
has  emerged  from,  covered  with  laurels  ;  let  us  now  do  something  to  ame- 
liorate the  internal  condition  of  the  country ;  let  us  show  that  objects  of 
domestic,  no  less  than  those  of  foreign  policy,  receive  our  attention ;  let 
us  fulfill  the  just  expectations  of  the  public,  whose  eyes  are  anxiously 
directed  toward  this  session  of  Congress;  let  us,  by  a  liberal  and  en- 
lightened policy,  entitle  ourselves,  upon  our  return  home,  to  that  best  of 
all  rewards,  the  grateful  exclamation,  "  Well  done,  thou  good  and  faithful 
servant." 


ON  THE  BILL  FOR  ENFORCING  NEUTRALITY, 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES,  JANUARY  24,  1817. 

[This  short  speech  is  chiefly  remarkable  as  Mr.  Clay's  debut  for 
the  independence  of  the  American  Spanish  Colonies.  The  object 
of  the  bill  before  Congress  was  to  prevent  the  building  of  armed 
vessels  in  our  ports,  and  selling  them  to  the  South  American 
States,  which  were  then  striving  for  independence.  It  was  con- 
tended that  this  was  a  violation  of  our  neutrality  in  relation  to 
the  parties  in  contest.  Mr.  Clay's  sympathies  were  powerfully 
enlisted  for  these  oppressed  colonies  of  Spain,  and  although  he 
would  not  advocate  a  violation  of  neutrality,  he  contended  that 
our  people  had  as  good  a  right  to  build  armed  vessels  to  order,  as 
to  engage  in  any  other  foreign  trade,  and  we  were  not  responsible 
for  the  use  that  might  be  made  of  them.  Such  seems  to  have 
been  the  practice  of  our  people  from  that  time  to  this.  It  must 
be  confessed,  however,  that  this  is  not  a  perfectly  clear  question. 
If  Mr.  Clay's  sympathies  ever  overpowered  his  judgment  in  plead- 
ing the  cause  of  the  oppressed,  this,  perhaps,  was  an  instance. 
His  heart,  certainly,  was  in  the  right  place.] 

Mr.  Clay  (in  Committee  of  the  Whole),  said :  As  long  as  the  govern- 
ment abstained  from  taking  any  part  in  the  contest  now  carrying  on  in  the 
southern  part  of  this  continent,  it  was  unquestionably  its  duty  to  maintain 
a  strict  neutrality.  On  that  point  there  was  and  could  be  no  difference  of 
opinion.  It  ought  not,  however,  to  be  overlooked,  that  the  two  parties 
stood  with  this  government  on  unequal  ground.  One  of  them  had  an  ac- 
credited minister  here,  to  watch  over  its  interests,  and  to  remonstrate 
against  any  acts  of  which  it  might  complain  ;  while  the  other,  being  wholly 
unrepresented,  had  no  organ  through  which  to  communicate  its  giievances. 
This  inequality  of  condition  in  the  contending  parties,  imposed  upon  us 
the  duty  of  great  circumspection  and  prudence  in  what  we  might  do. 

Whenever  a  war  exists,  whether  between  two  independent  states  or  be- 
tween parts  of  a  common  empire,  he  knew  of  but  two  relations  in  which 
other  powers  could  stand  toward  the  belligerents ;  the  one  was  that  of 
neutrality,  and  the  other  that  of  a  belligerent. 


ON  THE   BILL   FOR   ENFORCING   NEUTRALITY.  101 

Being  then  in  a  state  of  neutrality  respecting  the  contest,  and  bound  to 
maintain  it,  the  question  was,  whether  the  provisions  of  the  bill  were  nec- 
essary to  the  performance  of  that  duty  ?  It  will  be  recollected  that  we 
have  an  existing  law,  directed  against  armaments,  such  as  are  described  in 
the  bill.  That  law  was  passed  in  1794.  It  was  intended  to  preserve  our 
neutrality  in  the  contest  between  France  and  her  enemies.  The  circum- 
stances under  which  it  was  passed,  must  be  yet  fresh  in  our  recollection. 
The  French  revolution  had  excited  a  universal  enthusiasm  in  the  cause  of 
liberty.  The  flame  reached  this  country,  and  spread  with  electric  rapidity 
throughout  the  continent.  There  was  not  a  State,  county,  city  or  village, 
exempted  from  it.  An  ardent  disposition  to  enter  into  the  conflict,  on  the 
side  of  France,  was  everywhere  felt.  General  Washington  thought  it 
the  interest  of  this  country  to  remain  neutral,  and  the  law  of  1794  was 
enacted,  to  restrain  our  citizens  from  taking  part  in  the  contest.  If  that 
law  had  been  effectual  to  preserve  the  neutrality  of  this  country,  during 
the  stormy  period  of  the  French  revolution,  we  ought  to  pause  before  we 
assent  to  the  adoption  of  new  penalties  and  provisions.  If  the  law  did  not 
reach  the  case  (which  he  understood  to  be  doubtful  from  some  judicial  de- 
cisions), he  was  willing  to  legislate  so  far  as  to  make  it  comprehend  it. 
Further  than  that,  as  at  present  advised,  he  was  not  willing  to  go. 

But  the  present  bill  not  only  went  further,  but,  in  his  judgment,  con- 
tained provisions  not  demanded  of  us  by  our  neutral  duties.  It  contained 
two  principles  not  embraced  by  the  law  of  1794.  The  first  was,  the  requisi- 
tion of  a  bond  from  the  owners  of  armed  vessels,  that  persons,  to  whom 
they  might  sell  these  vessels,  should  not  use  them  in  the  contest.  The  sec- 
ond was,  the  power  vested  in  the  collectors  to  seize  and  detain,  under  cer- 
tain circumstances,  any  such  vessels.  Now,  with  regard  to  the  first  pro- 
vision, it  is  not  denied  that  an  armed  vessel  may  be  lawfully  sold  by  an 
American  citizen  to  a  foreign  subject,  other  than  a  subject  of  Spain.  But 
on  what  ground  is  it  possible,  then,  to  maintain,  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the 
American  citizen  to  become  responsible  for  the  subsequent  use  which  may 
be  made  of  such  vessel  by  the  foraign  subject  ?  We  are  bound  to  take 
care  that  our  own  citizens  do  not  violate  our  neutrality,  but  we  are  under 
no  such  obligation  as  it  respects  the  subjects  of  foreign  powers.  It  is  the 
business  of  those  foreign  powers  to  guard  the  conduct  of  their  own  sub- 
jects. If  it  be  true,  as  he  heard  it  asserted,  that  Fell's  Point  exhibits  an 
activity  in  hostile  preparation,  not  surpassed  during  the  late  war,  we  had 
enough  to  do  with  our  own  citizens.  It  was  not  incumbent  upon  us,  as  a 
neutral  power,  to  provide,  after  a  legal  sale  had  been  made  of  an  armed 
vessel  to  a  foreign  subject,  against  any  illegal  use  of  the  vessel. 

Gentlemen  have  contended,  that  this  bill  ought  to  be  considered  as  in- 
tended merely  to  enforce  our  own  laws  ;  as  a  municipal  regulation,  having 
no  relation  to  the  war  now  existing.  It  was  impossible  to  deceive  our- 
selves, as  to  the  true  character  of  the  measure.  Bestow  on  it  what  denom- 
ination you  please,  disguise  it  as  you  may,  it  is  a  law,  and  will  be  under- 


102  SPEECHES   OF  HENRY   CLAY. 

stood  by  the  whole  world  as  a  law,  to  discountenance  any  aid  being  given 
to  the  South  American  colonies  in  a  state  of  revolution  against  the  parent 
country.  With  respect  to  the  nature  of  that  struggle,  he  had  now,  for 
the  first  time,  to  express  his  opinion  and  his  wishes.  An  honorable  gen- 
tleman from  Virginia  (Mr.  Sheffey)  had  said,  the  people  of  South  America 
were  incapable,  from  the  ignorance  and  superstition  which  prevail  among 
them,  of  achieving  independence  or  enjoying  liberty.  And  to  what  cause 
is  that  ignorance  and  superstition  owing  ?  Was  it  not  to  the  vices  of  their 
government  ?  to  the  tyranny  and  oppression,  hierarchical  and  political, 
under  which  they  groaned  ?  If  Spain  succeeded  in  riveting  their  chains 
upon  them,  would  not  that  ignorance  and  superstition  be  perpetuated  ?  In 
the  event  of  that  success,  he  feared  the  time  would  never  arrive,  when  the 
good  wishes  of  the  honorable  gentleman  from  Virginia  would  be  conciliated 
in  behalf  of  that  oppressed  and  suffering  people.  For  his  part,  he  wished 
their  independence.  It  was  the  first  step  toward  improving  their  condi- 
tion. Let  them  have  free  government,  if  they  be  capable  of  enjoying  it ; 
but  let  them  have,  at  all  events,  independence.  Yes,  from  the  inmost  re- 
cesses of  my  soul,  I  wish  them  independence.  I  may  be  accused  of  an 
imprudent  utterance  of  my  feelings,  on  this  occasion.  I  care  not ;  when 
the  independence,  the  happiness,  the  liberty  of  a  whole  people,  is  at  stake, 
and  that  people  our  neighbors,  our  brethren,  occupying  a  portion  of  the 
same  continent,  imitating  our  example,  and  participating  of  the  same  sym- 
pathies with  ourselves,  I  will  boldly  avow  my  feelings  and  my  wishes  in 
their  behalf,  even  at  the  hazard  of  such  an  imputation. 

But,  notwithstanding  the  feelings  which  he  cherished  on  this  subject, 
Mr.  Clay  admitted  that  it  became  us  not  to  exhibit  the  spectacle  of  a  peo- 
ple at  war  and  a  government  at  peace.  We  ought  to  perform  our  neutral 
duties,  while  we  are  neutral,  without  regard  to  the  unredressed  injuries  in- 
flicted upon  us  by  old  Spain  on  the  one  hand,  or  to  the  glorious  object  of 
the  struggle  of  the  South  American  patriots  on  the  other.  We  ought  to 
render  strict  justice,  and  no  more.  If  the  bill  on  the  table  was  limited  to 
that  object,  he  would  vote  for  it.  But  he  thought  it  went  further ;  that  it 
assumed  obligations  which  we  were  not  bound  to  incur,  a_id,  thinking  so, 
he  could  not,  in  its  present  shape,  give  to  it  his  assent. 


ON   COMMERCIAL   RESTRICTIONS  WITH  THE 
BRITISH  WEST  INDIES 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OP  REPRESENTATIVES,  JANUARY  30,  1817. 

[A  commercial  convention  between  Great  Britain  and  the 
United  States,  had  been  so  carelessly  agreed  to  on  our  part,  that 
Great  Britain  was  able  to  prohibit  our  trade  with  her  West 
India  Islands,  so  far  as  that  it  should  be  exclusively  carried  on 
in  her  own  bottoms  ;  and  this  trade  amounted  to  six  millions 
of  dollars  annually,  on  each  side— in  all  twelve  millions.  It  was 
obviously  unjust,  in  its  operation,  on  the  navigation  of  the 
United  States,  and  threw  us  out,  as  carriers,  of  a  foreign  trade 
of  six  millions  a-year.  It  became  a  profound  study  of  American 
statesmen  how  to  recover  this  obvious  right,  whether  to  impose 
heavy  duties  on  our  imports  from  the  British  West  Indies,  or  to 
enact  a  total  prohibition.  The  subject  was  much  discussed  in 
1816,  on  a  resolution  ;  and  came  up  again  in  1817,  in  the  shape  of 
a  bill,  when  Mr.  Clay  made  the  following  speech  in  Committee  of 
the  Whole.  The  bill  proposed  "  to  prohibit  all  commercial  in- 
tercourse with  ports  or  places  into  or  with  which  the  vessels  of 
the  United  States  are  not  ordinarily  permitted  to  enter  or 
trade."  Mr.  Clay  was  in  favor  of  the  bill,  first,  because  high 
duties  on  imports  from  these  places,  would  be  effectual  only  as 
they  approximated  to  prohibition  ;  and  secondly,  because  we 
would  still  have  the  same  trade  through  islands  belonging  to 
other  powers,  and  have  our  share  of  the  carrying  ;  and  this 
would  bring  Great  Britain  to  terms.     The  bill,  however,  failed.] 

Mr.  Clay  (in  Committee  of  the  Whole),  said,  that  in  one  sentiment  ex- 
pressed by  the  gentleman  from  Georgia  he  most  heartily  concurred  :  that 
the  measure  contemplated  by  the  bill,  or  by  the  proposed  substitute,  was 
the  most  important,  as  respected  at  least  our  foreign  relations,  that  had 
come  before  Congress  at  this  session,  or  would  probably  be  brought  before 
it  for  some  years — a  measure  which,  whatever  fate  attended  it,  ought  to 


104  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

attract  the  attention  of  honorable  members  of  this  House,  and  to  which  he 
hoped,  before  the  fiual  question  on  it,  they  would  give  the  most  mature 
consideration. 

The  importance  of  the  question  by  no  means  depended  simply  on  the 
value  of  the  trade  between  this  country  and  the  colonies  of  Great  Britain. 
But  considering  the  question  as  it  related  merely  to  that  trade,  when  the 
fact  was  stated,  that  it  consisted  of  six  millions  of  dollars  imports,  and  of 
course  a  like  amount  of  exports,  it  must  be  admitted  the  question  was  one 
of  deep  import,  compared  to  any  which  at  present  presented  itself  to  the 
attention  of  Congress.  But,  as  was  stated  in  the  president's  message,  it 
was  not  solely  important  on  account  of  the  effect  of  the  colonial  system 
on  that  trade,  but  the  fact  was,  that  the  exclusion  from  a  participation  in 
that  navigation,  essentially  affected  the  trade  between  this  country  and  the 
British  European  possessions,  and,  by  the  operation  of  the  system,  de-  ■* 
prived  us,  in  a  great  measure,  of  the  benefits  of  the  convention  of  com- 
merce with  Great  Britain,  which  provided  for  the  establishment  of  a  per-  .,■ 
feet  reciprocity  of  commerce  between  the  United  States  and  the  British 
European  possessions.  Even  if  gentlemen  were  not  disposed  to  do  some- 
thing to  obtain  for  the  navigation  of  this  country  a  participation  in  the 
colonial  trade,  they  ought  to  go  so  far  as  to  place  it  on  an  equal  foot- 
ing as  regarded  the  European  trade.  Some  measure  ought  to  be  devised, 
by  which  the  navigation  of  Great  Britain  should  be  prevented  from  enjoy- 
ing peculiar  advantages  over  us,  in  a  trade  wherein  reciprocity  had  been 
solemnly  promised  by  the  convention  to  which  he  had  alluded. 

Let  us,  then,  inquire  into  the  character  of  the  evil  proposed  to  be  rem- 
edied, and  of  the  remedy  that  is  offered.  What  is  the  evil  ?  Great 
Britain  says  that  the  whole  commerce  between  her  colonies  and  the  United 
States  shall  be  carried  on  in  British  ships,  absolutely  excluding  American 
ships  from  any  participation  in  it.  The  most  natural  course  of  the  ex- 
change of  commodities  between  nations  mii^ht  be  thus  defined :  that  each 
nation  should  carry  its  own  products  to  market ;  that  we  should  carry  of 
our  produce  what  we  do  not  want,  but  they  do,  to  British  ports ;  and  that 
they  should  bring  what  they  do  not  want,  but  we  do,  to  our  ports.  With 
this  course,  however,  Great  Britain  was  not  satisfied.  The  next  and  per- 
haps the  most  equal  and  best  mode  of  providing  for  the  free  and  fair 
interchange  of  commodities,  was  to  open  the  trade  equally  and  recipro- 
cally to  both  parties,  to  let  each  carry  the  commodities  of  both  countries, 
in  a  fair  competition.  Great  Britain  was  not,  however,  disposed  to  do 
this.  She  not  only  prohibited  the  carriage  of  her  colonial  commodities 
in  our  vessels ;  not  only  entirely  engrossed  the  export  trade  from  her  col- 
onies, but  refused  to  allow  us  any  participation,  by  conventional  regula- 
tion or  otherwise,  in  the  trade  to  the  colonies.  The  effect  was,  to  deprive 
us  of  the  advantages,  in  the  augmentation  of  our  commerce  and  increase 
of  our  seamen,  which  would  result  from  the  carriage  of  our  own  produce, 
to  the  amount  of  six  millions  of  dollars  annually. 


ON    COMMERCIAL    RESTRICTIONS.  105 

With  regard  to  the  importance  of  encouraging  our  navigation,  he  said, 
he  need  not  resort  to  argument.  The  question  of  the  importance  of  a 
navy,  to  maintain  and  defend  our  rights,  which  had  been  some  years  ago 
a  question  of  a  theoretical  nature,  was  no  longer  so ;  it  was  now  a  question 
of  practical  experience.  All  felt  its  importance  and  all  acknowledged  the 
expediency  of  cherishing,  by  all  means  in  our  power,  that  important  branch 
of  national  defense. 

Gentlemen  alarmed  themselves  by  the  apprehension  that  the  other  party 
would  view  as  inimical  any  regulations  countervailing  her  colonial  policy, 
and  that  the  issue  of  this  conflict  of  commercial  regulations  would  be 
war.  He  believed  in  no  such  result.  If  an  exclusion  of  the  navigation 
and  shipping  of  Great  Britain  from  our  ports  be  a  measure  of  a  hostile 
character,  said  Mr.  Clay,  Great  Britain  has  set  us  the  example ;  for  she 
excludes  our  navigation  and  shipping  from  an  extensive  range  of  her  ports. 
He  considered  this  rather  as  a  diplomatic  than  a  hostile  measure  ;  but,  if 
it  were  otherwise,  she  had  set  the  example,  which  she  could  not  complain 
if  we  followed. 

But,  said  he,  let  us  look  to  the  fact.  What  would  be  the  light  in  which 
Great  Britain  would  view  any  such  regulations  as  are  proposed  by  the  bill  ? 
The  convention  of  London  contains  an  express  stipulation  on  the  subject ; 
and  I  will  observe  to  gentlemen,  that  the  clause  which  exempts  the  colonial 
trade  from  the  second  article  of  the  convention,  was  introduced  with  the 
express  view  of  retaining  in  our  hands  the  right  to  countervail  the  British 
regulations  in  this  respect.  It  was  so  understood  by  the  framers  of  that 
convention.  But  we  have  later  evidence  than  that  which  is  furnished  by 
the  terms  of  the  convention.  The  president,  in  his  message  at  the  opening 
of  the  session,  says,  that  it  is  ascertained,  "  that  the  British  government 
declines  all  negotiation  on  this  subject ;  ivith  a  disavowal,  however,  of  any 
disposition  to  view  in  an  unfriendly  light,  whatever  countervailing  regula- 
tions the  United  States  may  oppose  to  the  regulation  of  which  they  com- 
plain." Thus,  then,  we  have  evidence,  both  from  the  nature  of  the  case, 
and  from  the  express  declarations  of  the  British  government,  that  it  will 
not,  because  it  can  not,  view  in  an  unfriendly  light  any  regulations  which 
this  government  may  find  it  expedient  to  adopt,  to  countervail  their  policy. 
Mr.  Clay  said,  he  did  not  think  that  the  adoption  of  this  policy  on  the  part 
of  Great  Britain,  ought  to  excite  any  hostile  feeling  toward  her.  She  was 
not  singular  in  this  respect.  Every  country  that  has  colonies  in  the  West 
Indies,  and  which  is  not  too  weak  to  defend  them,  endeavored,  he  said,  to 
appropriate  to  itself  all  the  advantages  of  the  trade  with  those  colonies ; 
and  it  would  be  found  that  the  relaxation  of  the  rigor  of  that  system  by 
one  nation  or  auother,  was  precisely  graduated  by  the  degree  of  ability  to 
maintain  their  colonies  in  peace,  and  defend  them  in  war.  There  was 
nothing  in  the  regulations  of  Great  Britain,  which  could  be  offensive,  or 
possibly  lead  to  war.  They  might  be  complained  of  as  selfish  or  unfriendly, 
they  certainly  were  the  former.     But  Great  Britain  had  a  perfect  right  to 


106  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

set  the  example  before  us ;  and  the  question  was,  whether  the  total  exclusion 
of  our  ships  fiom  the  colonial  ports  of  Britain,  was  such  a  measure  as  we 
ouii'ht  to  fold  our  arms  and  submit  to,  without  an  effort  to  obtain  some  part 
of  the  trade  which  she  had  attempted  to  appropriate  exclusively  to  herself? 

Gentlemen  had  properly  said,  that  this  was  a  question  which  ought  to 
be  well  weighed  before  decided.  Whatever  we  do,  it  ought  to  be  with  a 
determination  to  adhere  firmly  to  it.  For,  depend  upon  it,  Great  Britain 
will  never  lightly  relax  her  policy. 

The  policy  of  Great  Britain  was  deeply  laid  in  selfish  considerations  ;  a 
policy  which  she  had  never  relaxed,  except  in  periods  of  war,  when  it  be- 
came her  interest  to  do  so,  from  the  commencement  of  her  colonies  to 
this  time.  The  measure  which  we  address  to  her  interest,  to  induce  her 
to  relax  from  the  rigor  of  her  colonial  policy,  should  be  a  measure  framed 
with  ample  deliberation,  which,  when  we  adopt  with  resolution,  we  will 
maintain  with  fortitude.  For,  the  first  conclusion  of  the  British  govern- 
ment would  undoubtedly  be,  that  the  American  government  would  be  in- 
capable of  maintaining  its  regulations  for  any  length  of  time ;  and  that 
government  in  the  expectation  of  a  retraction  of  the  measure,  would  per- 
severe in  its  policy  as  long  as  it  could. 

The  question  which  presents  itself,  then,  is,  whether  we  will  adopt  meas- 
ures to  induce  a  relaxation  so  desirable  to  our  interest  ? 

What  ought  to  be  done,  if  any  thing  is  ?  There  were  two  propositions 
before  the  House,  and  the  question  now  was,  on  substituting  high  duties 
for  the  prohibitory  system.  He  preferred  the  prohibition  ;  and  if  any 
gentleman  would  candidly  compare  the  merits  of  the  two  proposed  reme- 
dies, he  would  find  that  the  whole  value  of  the  remedy,  by  the  imposition 
of  duties,  was  derived  from  its  approximation  to  prohibition. 

Suppose  the  measure  of  prohibition  be  adopted,  what  would  be  its  effect  ? 
In  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Clay,  a  mere  change  in  the  direction  of  the  trade. 
St.  Domingo  would  be  opened  to  us,  St.  Thomas,  Vera  Cruz,  and  possibly 
St.  Bartholomews,  and  other  islands  and  ports.  But,  if  not  one  port 
should  be  open,  the  necessity  Great  Britain  would  be  under,  to  obtain  sup- 
plies for  her  colonies,  would  dictate  the  expediency  of  opening  some  port 
at  which  an  interchange  of  commodities  could  take  place.  If  this  opera- 
tion took  place,  all  that  is  proposed  to  be  effected  by  the  bill  is  accom- 
plished, by  the  participation  of  our  navigation  in  the  transportation  of  the 
articles  thus  exchanged.  Our  ships  will  have  obtained  an  employment,  in 
carrying  our  products  to  that  entrepot,  and  bringing  return  cargoes,  of  the 
same  amount  they  would  have  now,  if  American,  instead  of  British  ships, 
wholly  engrossed  the  trade.  There  might,  in  the  case  supposed,  be  some 
little  increase  in  the  cost  of  the  articles,  but  so  inconsiderable,  as  not  to 
amount  to  any  offset  to  the  great  advantages  accruing  to  this  country,  from 
the  employment  of  its  tonnage. 

The  present  moment  Mr.  Clay  considered  as  particularly  propitious  to 
the  adoption  of  this  regulation ;  because,  as  regarded  the  great  direct 
trade  between  the  United  States  and  British  ports  in  Europe,  that  was  reg- 


ON   COMMERCIAL   RESTRICTIONS.  107 

ulated  and  unalterable  for  nearly  three  years.  It  stood  on  the  footing  of 
convention ;  and  we  should  not,  by  any  regulation  adopted  in  regard  to 
the  colonial  trade,  put  to  hazard  the  advantages  in  the  other,  at  least  until 
that  convention  expired. 

Regarding  this  regulation  in  another  view,  he  anticipated  beneficial 
effects  from  it.  In  consequence  of  the  weakness  of  some  of  the  powers 
of  Europe  in  their  maritime  force,  they  had  found  it  convenient  to  open 
ports  to  us,  which  were  formerly  shut,  and  we  could  thence  draw  our  sup- 
plies, thus  effecting  a  mere  change  in  the  channel  of  supply  with  the  ad- 
vantage of  the  employment  of  our  own  navigation,  as  already  stated. 
South  America,  besides,  would  be  open  to  us,  and  we  could  there  obtain  a 
large  portion  of  the  commodities  we  import  from  the  West  Indies,  except, 
perhaps,  the  article  of  rum.  Whether  that  could  be  obtained  there  or  not, 
he  did  not  know.  Sugar  might  be  obtained,  in  quantity,  from  Louisiana, 
where  the  product  of  that  article  increased  every  year.  Georgia,  and  a 
portion  of  South  Carolina,  too,  had  turned  their  attention  to  that  object ; 
and  the  effect  of  this  measure  would  be.  to  encourao-e  the  cultivation  of 

7  O 

that  article.  With  respect  to  the  article  of  spirits,  if  its  importation 
were  totally  cut  off,  he  thought  it  would  be  a  benefit.  He  believed,  he 
said,  that  America  was  the  only  country  that  imported  as  great  a  quantity 
of  spirituous  liquors  ;  every  other  country  he  was  acquainted  with,  used 
more  of  its  own  manufacture. 

I  think  that  the  suffering  of  the  navigating  interest,  to  which  the  atten- 
tion of  Congress  is  attracted,  is  one  which  calls  loudly  on  this  body  to  do 
something  to  alleviate  it.  It  is  attributable  greatly  to  the  colonial  system 
of  Great  Britain,  though  no  doubt  also  greatly  to  the  state  of  peace,  and 
the  consequent  resumption  of  their  navigation  by  the  powers  of  Europe, 
who,  during  war,  suspended  a  great  proportion  of  it.  Taking  care  of  the 
interests  of  the  nation,  and  guarding  our  commerce  against  the  effect  of 
foreign  regulations,  it  becomes  us  to  act  on  this  subject.  lie  should,  he 
said,  cheerfully  give  his  assent,  therefore,  to  the  bill  before  the  House ;  and 
should  vote  for  it,  but  with  reluctance,  if  the  amendment  proposed  by  Mr. 
Forsyth  should  succeed. 

The  great  question  was,  the  modus  operandi  of  this  bill,  to  use  a  favorite 
expression  of  a  member  of  another  body.  Operating  on  the  sympathy  as 
well  as  the  direct  interest  of  the  parent  country,  it  would  induce  her  to 
relax  her  system.  Great  Britain  would  find  a  greater  interest  in  securing 
the  amount  of  six  millions  of  trade,  necessary  to  support  and  cherish  her 
colonies,  than  she  would  gain  merely  on  the  transportation  of  the  articles 
of  which  that  trade  consists.  That  was  the  question  on  which  the  British 
peoj)le  would  be  called  on  to  decide ;  and  he  believed  the  effect  of  this 
measure  would  be  such  as  to  induce  them  to  decide  in  favor  of  admitting 
us,  on  a  footing  of  reciprocity,  into  the  West  India  trade.  If  the  British 
government  did  not  take  this  course,  it  would  have  to  wink  at  the  forma- 
tion of  entrepots,  by  which  the  object  proposed  by  the  bill  would  be  sub- 
stantially accomplished. 


ON   INTERNAL    IMPROVEMENT. 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OP  REPRESENTATIVES,  FEBRUARY  4,  1811. 

[It  was  proposed  by  a  bill  introduced  into  the  Fourteenth 
Congress,  1816-17,  to  set  apart,  as  a  fund  for  internal  improve- 
ment, the  bonus  granted  to  the  United  States  by  the  national 
bank,  and  the  dividend  accruing  from  the  United  States'  shares 
in  said  bank  ;  and  the  bill  was  passed  by  both  Houses  of  Con- 
gress, but  was,  unexpectedly,  vetoed  by  President  Madison,  on 
constitutional  grounds.  This  veto  proved  the  beginning  of  ob- 
stacles of  this  kind,  interposed  by  Virginia  abstractions,  to  many 
other  similar  measures,  afterward  brought  forward  by  Mr.  Clay 
and  his  associates,  for  internal  improvement.  It  is  remarkable 
that  the  Hon.  John  C.  Calhoun  was  in  company  with  Mr.  Clay 
at  this  time,  on  this  subject.  So  also  on  the  Bank  question  in 
1816,  Mr.  Calhoun  himself,  reported  the  Bank  bill  of  that  year, 
and  advocated  and  voted  for  it.  But  the  change  which  came 
over  his  dreams  after  that,  is  very  notorious,  both  as  regards  a 
national  bank  and  internal  improvements.  The  following  short 
speech  of  Mr.  Clay  is  among  his  first  efforts  in  this  great  cause. 
The  Cumberland  road  was  already  on  its  way  to  the  great  West, 
and  Mr.  Clay,  as  will  be  seen,  contemplated  a  similar  enterprise 
along  the  Atlantic  coast,  from  Maine  to  Georgia.  It  is  well 
enough,  perhaps,  that  it  was  never  undertaken,  as  our  modern 
railway  system  has  superseded  its  necessity.  But  the  project,  as 
announced,  illustrates  the  genius,  as  well  as  the  patriotic  zeal, 
of  Mr.  Clay.  He  was  right  in  his  grand  conception,  though  the 
mode  of  its  accomplishment  could  not  then  be  foreseen.] 

Mr.  Clay  (in  Committee  of  the  Whole)  obsei'ved,  that  it  was  not  his  in- 
tention to  enter  into  the  general  discussion  of  the  subject ;  he  -wished 
only  to  say,  that  he  had  long  thought  that  there  were  no  two  subjects 
which  could  engage  the  attention  of  the  national  Legislature,  more  worthy 
of  its  deliberate  consideration,  than  those  of  internal  improvements  and 
domestic  manufactures. 


ON  INTERNAL  IMPROVEMENT.  109 

As  to  the  constitutional  point  which  had  been  made,  he  had  not  a  doubt 
on  his  mind ;  but  it  was  not  necessary,  in  his  judgment,  to  embarrass  the 
passage  of  the  bill  with  the  argument  of  that  point  at  this  time.  It  was 
a  sufficient  answer  to  say,  that  the  power  was  not  now  to  be  exercised.  It 
was  proposed  merely  to  designate  the  fund,  and  from  time  to  time,  as  the 
proceeds  of  it  came  in,  to  invest  them  in  the  funded  debt  of  the  United 
States.  It  would  thus  be  accumulating ;  and  Congress  could,  at  some 
future  day,  examine  into  the  constitutionality  of  the  question,  and  if  it  has 
the  power,  it  would  exercise  it ;  if  it  has  not,  the  Constitution,  there  could 
be  very  little  doubt,  would  be  so  amended  as  to  confer  it.  It  was  quite 
obvious,  however,  that  Congress  might  so  direct  the  application  of  the 
fund,  as  not  to  interfere  with  the  jurisdiction  of  the  several  States,  and 
thus  avoid  the  difficulty  which  had  been  started.  It  might  distribute  it 
among  those  objects  of  private  enterprise  which  called  for  national  patron- 
age in  the  form  of  subscriptions  to  the  capital  stock  of  incorporated  com- 
panies, such  as  that  of  the  Delaware  and  Chesapeake  canal,  and  other 
similar  institutions.  Perhaps  that  might  be  the  best  way  to  employ  the 
fund  ;  but,  he  repeated,  this  was  not  the  time  to  go  into  their  inquiry. 

With  regard  to  the  general  importance  of  the  proposition,  the  effect  of 
internal  improvements  in  cementing  the  Union  ;  in  facilitating  internal  trade; 
in  augmenting  the  wealth  and  the  population  of  the  country ;  he  would 
not  consume  the  time  of  the  committee  in  discussing  those  interesting 
topics,  after  the  able  manner  in  which  they  had  been  treated  by  his  friend 
from  South  Carolina.  In  reply  to  those  who  thought  that  internal  im- 
provements had  better  be  left  to  the  several  States,  he  would  ask,  he 
would  put  it  to  the  candor  of  every  one,  if  there  were  not  various  objects 
in  which  many  States  were  interested,  and  which,  requiring  therefore  their 
joint  co-operation  would,  if  not  taken  up  by  the  general  government,  be 
neglected,  either  for  the  want  of  resources,  or  from  the  difficulty  of  regulat- 
ing their  respective  contributions.  Such  was  the  case  with  the  improve- 
ment of  the  navigation  of  the  Ohio  at  the  rapids ;  the  canal  from  the 
Hudson  to  the  Lakes  ;  the  great  turnpike  road,  parallel  with  the  coast  from 
Maine  to  Louisiana.  These,  and  similar  objects,  were  stamped  with  a 
national  character,  and  they  required  the  wisdom  and  the  resources  of  the 
nation  to  accomplish  them.  No  particular,  State  felt  an  individual  in- 
terest sufficient  to  execute  improvements  of  such  magnitude.  They  must 
be  patronized,  efficaciously  patronized,  by  the  general  government,  or  they 
never  would  be  accomplished. 

The  practical  effect  of  turnpike  roads  in  correcting  the  evil,  if  it  be  one, 
of  the  great  expansion  of  our  republic,  and  in  conquering  space  itself,  as 
was  expressed  by  the  gentleman  from  South  Carolina,  is  about  to  be  de- 
monstrated by  the  great  turnpike-road  from  Cumberland  to  Wheeling. 
That  road  is  partially  executed,  and  will  probably  be  completed  in  about 
three  years.  In  the  mean  time,  Maryland  is  extending  a  line  of  turnpike- 
roads  from  Baltimore  to  Cumberland,  which  is  also  partially  finished,  and 


110  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

will  be  completed  in  the  same  period.  Three  years  from  the  present  time 
we  shall  have  a  continued  line  of  turnpike  roads  from  Baltimore  to  Ohio. 
The  ordinary  time  requisite  to  travel  from  Wheeling  to  Baltimore,  prior  to 
the  erection  of  these  roads,  was  eight  days.  When  the  roads  are  com- 
pleted the  same  journey  may  be  performed  in  three  days.  The  distance, 
in  effect,  between  these  two  points,  will  be  diminished  in  the  proportion 
of  five  eighths,  or,  in  other  words,  they  will  be  brought  five  days  nearer  to 
each  other.  Similar  results  will  follow  wherever  this  species  of  improve- 
ment is  effected. 

Mr.  Clay  owned  that  he  felt  anxiously  desirous  for  the  success  of  this 
measure.  He  was  anxious,  from  its  intrinsic  merits ;  from  his  sincere  con- 
viction of  its  tendency  greatly  to  promote  the  welfare  of  our  common 
country.  He  was  anxious  from  other,  perhaps  more  selfish  considerations. 
He  wished  the  Fourteenth  Congress^to  have  the  merit  of  laying  the  founda- 
tions of  this  great  work.  He  wished  this  Congress  who,  in  his  opinion, 
had  so  many  other  just  grounds  for  the  national  approbation,  notwith- 
standing the  obloquy  which  had  attended  a  single  unfortunate  measure,  to 
add  this  new  claim  to  the  public  gratitude. 


ON  THE   WAR   BETWEEN   SPAIN  AND   HER 

COLONIES, 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES,  DECEMBER  3,  1817. 

[President  Monroe,  in  his  opening  Message  to  the  Fifteenth 
Congress,  1817,  had  noticed,  among  other  topics,  the  obligations 
of  neutrality  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  toward  Spain  and 
her  American  Colonies.  The  first  resolution  in  answer  to  the 
President's  Message,  brought  forward  in  Committee  of  the 
Whole,  related  to  this  subject  ;  and  Mr.  Clay  moved  and  sup- 
ported the  following  amendment :  "  And  that  the  said  Commit- 
tee be  instructed  to  inquire  whether  any,  and  if  any,  what, 
provisions  of  law  are  necessary  to  insure  to  the  American 
Colonies  of  Spain,  a  just  observance  of  the  duties  incidental  to 
the  neutral  relation  in  which  the  United  States  stand  in  the 
existing  war  between  them  and  Spain."  It  would  seem  that 
the  courts  of  the  United  States  had  been  employed  by  the  agents 
of  Spain  to  annoy  the  officers  and  agents  of  the  Spanish  Colonies 
when  found  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  United  States,  which 
was  obviously  a  violation  of  neutrality  between  the  two  belliger- 
ent parties.  Mr.  Clay  desired,  at  least,  that  both  parties  should 
be  treated  alike,  and  that  Spain  should  have  no  advantage  in 
our  courts  over  the  officers  and  agents  of  her  rebellious  provinces. 
If,  therefore,  our  laws  were  defective,  in  reference  to  this  object, 
he  wished  to  have  them  amended.  Mr.  Clay's  sympathies  were 
on  the  side  of  the  Colonies  ;  but  he  asked  nothing  for  them  but 
justice.  He  wished  them  to  be  recognized  as  a  belligerent  party, 
to  whom  we  were  under  the  same  obligations  as  to  Spain,  in  the 
observance  of  neutrality.     Hence  the  speech  given  below.] 

Mr.  Clay  (in  Committee  of  the  Whole)  said,  that  his  presenting,  at  so 
early  a  period  of  the  session,  this  subject  to  the  consideration  of  the 
House  was  in  consequence  of  certain  proceedings  which  he  had  seen  rep- 
resented in  the  public  prints  as  having  taken  place  before  certain  of  our 


112  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

courts  of  justice.     Two  or  three  cases  bearing  on  this  subject  had  come  to 
his  knowledge,  which  he  wished  to  state  to  the  House.     The  first  had  oc- 
curred  at  Philadelphia,  before  the  circuit  court  of  the  United  States  held 
in  that  city.     The  circumstances  of  the  case,  for  which,  however,  he  did 
not  pretend  to  vouch,  having  received  them  through  the  channel  already 
indicated,  were  these  :  if  they  were  incorrectly  stated,  he  was  happy  that 
a  gentleman  had  taken  his  seat  this  morning  from  that  city  who  would  be 
able  to  correct  him  ;  that  nine  or  ten  British  disbanded  officers  had  formed 
in  Europe  the  resolution  to  unite  themselves  with  the  Spanish  patriots  in 
the  contest  existing  between  them  and  Spain ;  that  to  carry  into  effect  this 
intention  they  had  sailed  from   Europe,   and  in  their  transit  to   South 
America  had  touched  at  the  port  of  Philadelphia;  that  during  their  resi- 
dence in  Philadelphia,  wearing,  perhaps,  the  arms  and  habiliments  of 
military  men,  making  no  disguise  of  their  intention  to  participate  in  the 
struggle,  they   took  passage   in  a  vessel  bound  to   some  port  in  South 
America ;  that  a  knowledge  of  this  fact  having  come  to  the  ears  of  the 
public  authorities,  or,  perhaps,   at  the  instigation  of  some  agent  of  the 
Spanish  government,  a  prosecution  was  commenced  against  these  officers, 
who,  from  their  inability  to  procure  bail,  were  confined  in  prison.     If,  said 
Mr.  Clay,  the  circumstances  attending  this  transaction  be  correctly  stated, 
it  becomes  an  imperious  duty  in  the  House  to  institute  the  inquiry  con- 
templated by  the  amendment  which  I  have  proposed.     That  this  was  an 
extraordinary  case  was  demonstrated  by  the  fiict  of  the  general  sensation 
which  it  had  excited  on  the  subject  in  the  place  where  it  had  occurred. 
Filled,  as   that   respectable  and  populous   city   is,  with  men   who   differ 
widely  on  political  topics,  and  entertaining  various  views  of  public  affairs, 
but  one   sentiment  prevailed   on  this  subject,  which  was  favorable  to  the 
persons  thus  arraigned.     With  regard  to  the  conduct  of  the  court  on  this 
occasion  be  would  say  nothing.     The  respect  which,  while  he  had  a  seat 
on  this  floor,  he  should  always  show  to  every  branch  of  the  government, 
the  respect  be  entertained  for  the  honorable  judge  who  had  presided,  for- 
bade him  from  pronouncing  the  decision  of  that  court  to  have  been  un- 
warranted by  law.     But  he  felt  himself  perfectly  sustained  in  saying,  that 
if  the  proceeding  was  warranted  by  the  existing  law,  it  was  the  imperious 
duty  of  Congress  to  alter  the  law  in  this  respect.     For  what,  he  asked, 
was  the  neutral  obligation  which  one  nation  owed  to  another  engaged  in 
war?     The  essence  of  it  is  this:  that  the  belligerent  means  of  the  neutral 
shall  not  be  employed  in  the  war  in  favor  of  either  of  the  parties.     That 
is  the  whole  of  the  obligation  of  a  third  party  in  a  war  between  two 
others ;  it  certainly  does  not  require  of  one  nation  to  restrain  the  belliger- 
ent means  of  other  nations.     If  those  nations  choose  to  permit  their  means 
to  be  employed  in  behalf  of  either  party,  it  is  their  business  to  look  to  it, 
and  not  ours.     Let  the  conduct  of  the  persons  prosecuted  be  regarded  in 
the  most  unfavorable  light ;  let  it  be  considered  as  the  passage  of  troops 
through  our  country,  and  there  was  nothing  in  our  neutral  obligations 


ON    THE    WAR    BETWEEN    SPAIN   AND    HER    COLONIES.        113 

forbidding  it.  The  passage  of  troops  through  a  neutral  country,  accord- 
ing to  his  impressions,  was  a  question  depending  on  the  particular  interest, 
quiet,  or  repose  of  the  country  traversed,  and  might  be  granted  or  refused 
at  its  discretion,  without  in  any  degree  affecting  the  obligation  of  the 
neutral  to  either  parties  engaged  in  the  controversy.  But,  surely,  this  was 
not  a  case  of  the  passage  of  troops ;  the  persons  apprehended  not  being 
sufficient  in  number,  nor  organized  or  equipped  in  such  a  manner  as,  under 
any  construction,  to  constitute  a  military  corps.  On  this  case  he  would 
detain  the  committee  no  longer,  he  said,  for  he  was  satisfied  they  could 
not  but  agree  with  him,  if  the  law  justified  the  proceeding  that  had  taken 
place,  that  law  ought  to  be  immediately  amended.  Other  cases  had  oc- 
curred in  which,  it  appeared  to  him,  it  became  the  Congress  to  interpose 
its  authority.  Persons  sailing  under  the  flag  of  the  provinces  had  been 
arraigned  in  our  courts,  and  tried  for  piracy ;  in  one  case,  after  having 
been  arraigned,  tried,  and  acquitted  of  piracy,  the  same  individuals,  on  the 
instigation  of  a  Spanish  officer  or  agent,  had  been  again  arraigned  for  the 
same  offense.  The  gentleman  from  Massachusetts  would  correct  him  if 
he  was  wrong,  for  the  case  had  occurred  in  the  town  of  Boston. 

We  admit  the  flag  of  these  colonies  into  our  ports ;  we  profess  to  be 
neutral ;  but  if  our  laws  pronounce,  that  the  moment  the  property  and  per- 
sons under  that  flag  enter  our  ports,  they  shall  be  seized,  the  one  claimed 
by  the  Spanish  minister  or  consul  as  the  property  of  Spain,  and  the  other 
prosecuted  as  pirates,  that  law  ought  to  be  altered,  if  we  mean  to  perform 
our  neutral  professions.     I  have  brought  this  subject  before  this  committee 
thus  promptly,  because  I  trust  that  here  the  cause  will  find  justice  ;  that, 
however  treated  elsewhere,  on  this  floor  will  be  found  a  guardian  interest 
attending  to  our  performance  of  the  just  obligations  of  neutrality.     Hith- 
erto, he  said,  whatever  might  have  been  our  intentions,  our  acts  had  been 
all  on  the  other  side.     From  the  proclamation  of  1815,  issued  to  terminate 
an  expedition  supposed  to  be  organizing  in   Louisiana,  an  expedition  only 
in  the  mind  of  Chevalier  de  Onis,  down  to  the  late  act — whether  the 
measure  was  a  proper  one  or  not,  he  did  not  say ;  his  confidence  in  the 
executive  led  him  to  suppose  it  was  adopted  on  sufficient  grounds — down 
to  the  order  for  suppressing,  as  it  was  called,  the  establishments  at  Amelia 
Island  and  Galveston — all  the  acts  of  the  government  had  been  on  one 
side ;  they  all  bore  against  the  colonies,  against  the  cause  in  which  the 
patriots  of  South  America  were  arduously  engaged.     It  became  us,  he  said, 
to  look  to  the  other  side,  honestly  intending  neutrality,  as  he  believed  we 
did.     Let  us  recollect  the  condition  of  the  patriots ;  no  minister  here  to 
spur  on  our  government,  as  was  said  in  an  interesting,  and,  it  appeared  to 
him,  a  very  candid  work,  recently  published  in  this  country,  respecting  the 
progress  of  the  South  American  Revolution  ;  no  minister  here  to  be  re- 
warded by  noble  honors,  in  consequence  of  the  influence  he  is  supposed  to 
possess  with  the  American  government.     No ;  their  unfortunate  case  was 
what  ours  had  been,  in  the  years  1778  and  1779  ;  their  ministers,  like  our 

8 


114  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

Franklins  and  Jays  at  that  day,  were  skulking  about  Europe,  imploring  in- 
exorable legitimacy  for  one  kind  look — some  aid  to  terminate  a  war  afflict- 
ing to  humanity.  Nay,  their  situation  was  worse  than  ours  ;  for  we  had 
one  great  and  magnanimous  ally  to  recognize  us,  but  no  nation  had  stepped 
forward  to  acknowledge  any  of  these  provinces.  Such  disparity  between 
the  parties,  demanded  a  just  attention  to  the  interests  of  the  party  which 
was  unrepresented ;  and  if  the  facts  which  he  had  mentioned,  and  others 
which  had  come  to  his  knowledge,  were  correct,  they  loudly  demanded  the 
interposition  of  Congress.  He  trusted  the  House  would  give  the  subject 
their  attention,  and  show  that  here,  in  this  place,  the  obligations  of  neutral- 
ity would  be  strictly  regarded  in  respect  to  South  America. 

[The  amendment  moved  by  Mr.  Clay  was  agreed  to,  without  opposition]. 


ON  INTERNAL  IMPROVEMENT, 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OP  REPRESENTATIVES,  MARCH  13,  1818. 

[For  sound,  irrefragable,  irresistible  argument,  the  following  is 
one  of  Mr.  Clay's  great  speeches,  characterized,  in  a  high  degree, 
with  his  peculiar  style  of  eloquence.  It  is  always  understood, 
that  Mr.  Clay  must  have  been  heard  to  be  fully  appreciated. 
The  eloquence  of  his  manner  and  voice,  when  thoroughly  roused, 
was  always  an  ineffable  charm.  The  tug  of  war  for  internal  im- 
provements, had  now  arrived ;  and  the  constitutional  question 
was  fairly  brought  into  the  arena,  by  the  highest  authority — to 
wit,  that  of  Mr.  Jefferson,  Mr.  Madison,  and  Mr.  Monroe.  Mr. 
Jefferson  had  expressed  himself  adverse  to  the  power,  before  he 
retired  from  public  life  ;  and  as  we  have  seen,  Mr.  Madison  had 
vetoed  a  bill  for  internal  improvement  the  day  before  the  expir- 
ation of  his  term  of  office,  notwithstanding  that  in  his  opening 
message  to  that  session  of  Congress,  he  had  recommended  action 
on  the  subject.  Mr.  Monroe — who  succeeded  Mr.  Madison,  on 
the  4th  of  March,  1817 — took  the  opportunity,  at  the  open- 
ing of  the  first  session  of  the  Fifteenth  Congress,  gratuitously  to 
declare  in  his  Message,  that  he  had  adopted  Mr.  Madison's 
opinion  on  this  question.  Nevertheless,  each  of  these  three 
authorities  recommended  an  alteration  in  the  Constitution,  con- 
ferring this  power,  which,  they  acknowledged,  was  so  much 
needed.  But  an  amendment  of  the  Constitution  was  apparently 
out  of  the  question.  The  only  open  path,  against  such  authority 
and  the  declared  opinion  of  the  incumbent  of  the  executive 
chair,  seemed  to  be,  to  obtain  the  sense  of  Congress,  on  this 
question  by  a  resolution.  Accordingly  a  resolution  was  offered 
in  the  House  of  Kepresentatives,  asserting  the  power  of  Congress, 
under  the  Constitution,  to  construct  military  roads,  post  roads, 
and  canals,  in  support  of  which  the  following  speech  was  deliv- 
ered by  Mr.  Clay.  The  resolution  was  carried  by  the  decisive 
majority  of  ninety  against  seventy-five,  a  signal  triumph  over  the 


116  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

authorities  arrayed  against  it.  Though  others  participated  in 
the  debate,  on  the  same  side  with  Mr.  Clay,  his  argument  had, 
doubtless,  an  irresistible  influence.  It  is  impossible  to  read  it 
without  feeling  that  such  must  have  been  its  power.  First,  he 
encounters  the  argument  of  his  opponents  in  the  committee, 
and  leaves  them  little  ground  to  stand  upon.  The  manner  in 
which  they  are  made  to  enact  their  part  is  amusing.  Mr.  Jeffer- 
son's reasoning  and  course  on  this  subject,  are  shown  to  be 
puerile  ;  and  as  to  Mr.  Madison's  veto,  he  killed  his  own  bill  ; 
for  he  had  virtually  recommended  it  ;  and  nothing  could  be 
more  surprising  to  his  friends  and  the  public  than  his  veto  mes- 
sage. On  Mr.  Monroe's  gratuity,  in  attempting,  in  his  opening 
message,  to  foreclose  all  debate  and  action  in  Congress  on  this 
subject.  Mr.  Clay  bestows  a  merited  rebuke.  Nothing  could  have 
been  more  improper.  But  Mr.  Monroe  had  himself  exercised 
these  powers,  and  set  the  army  to  making  military  roads — all 
which  Mr.  Clay  approved.  But  the  terrible  scathing  which  he 
gives  Mr.  Monroe  for  doing  that  very  thing,  as  the  executive 
officer  of  the  government,  which,  he  avers,  Congress  could  not 
authorize  to  be  done,  was  a  caution  against  the  practice  of  such 
inconsistency.  Driven  into  such  an  uncomfortable  corner,  and 
lashed  with  such  severity  while  there — the  severity  of  sarcasm 
only — Mr.  Monroe's  position  could  hardly  have  failed  to  excite 
commiseration,  at  the  same  time  that  it  afforded  an  inexhaust- 
ible fund  of  amusement.  Mr.  Monroe  was  an  excellent  man  and 
a  popular  president  ;  but  he  made  a  grand  mistake  in  this  mat- 
ter. It  is  remarkable  that  the  first  difficulties  thrown  in  the 
way  of  internal  improvements,  were  from  three  "Virginia  presi- 
dents, alias,  three  Virginia  abstractions.  If  they  could  always 
be  served  as  Mr.  Clay  served  these,  it  might  be  well  for  the 
country.] 

I  have  been  anxious,  said  Mr.  Clay,  (in  Committee  .of  the  Whole),  to 
catch  the  eye  of  the  chairman  for  a  few  moments,  to  reply  to  some  of  the 
observations  which  have  fallen  from  various  gentlemen.  I  am  aware  that, 
in  do'.xv  this,  I  risk  the  loss  of  what  is  of  the  utmost  value — the  kind  favor 
of  the  House,  wearied  as  its  patience  is,  by  this  prolonged  debate.  But 
when  I  feel  what  a  deep  interest  the  Union  at  large,  and  particularly  that 
quarter  of  it  whence  I  come,  has,  iu  the  decision  of  the  present  question,  I 
can  not  omit  any  opportunity  of  earnestly  urging  upon  the  House  the  pro- 
priety of  retaining  the  important  power  which  this  question  involves.  It 
will  be  recollected,  that  if  unfortunately  there  should  be  a  majority  both 
against  the  abstract  proposition  asserting  the  power,  and  against  its  prac- 


ON  INTERNAL  IMPROVEMENT.  117 

tical  execution,  the  power  is  gone  forever — the  question  is  put  at  rest,  so 
long  as  the  Constitution  remains  as  it  is  ;  and  with  respect  to  any  amend- 
ment, in  this  particular,  I  confess  I  utterly  despair.  It  will  be  borne  in 
mind,  that  the  bill  which  passed  Congress  on  this  subject,  at  the  last  ses- 
sion, was  rejected  by  the  late  president  of  the  United  States  ;  that  at  the 
commencement  of  the  present  session,  the  president  communicated  his 
clear  opinion,  after  every  effort  to  come  to  a  different  conclusion,  that  Con- 
gress does  not  possess  the  power  contended  for,  and  called  upon  us  to  take 
up  the  subject,  in  the  shape  of  an  amendment  to  the  Constitution ;  and, 
moreover,  that  the  predecessor  of  the  present  and  late  presidents,  has  also 
intimated  Lis  opinion,  that  Congress  does  not  possess  the  power.  With 
the  great  weight  and  authority  of  the  opinions  of  these  distinguished  men 
against  the  power,  and  with  the  fact,  solemnly  entered  upon  the  record, 
that  this  House,  after  a  deliberate  review  of  the  ground  taken  by  it  at  the 
last  session,  has  decided  against  the  existence  of  it  (if  such,  fatally,  shall 
be  the  decision),  the  power,  I  repeat,  is  gone — gone  forever,  unless  restored 
by  an  amendment  of  the  Constitution.  With  regard  to  the  practicability 
of  obtaining  such  an  amendment,  I  think  it  altogether  out  of  the  question. 
Two  different  descriptions  of  persons,  entertaining  sentiments  directly  op- 
posed, will  unite  and  defeat  such  an  amendment ;  one  embracing  those 
who  believe  that  the  Constitution,  fairly  interpreted,  already  conveys  the 
power  ;  and  the  other,  those  who  think  that  Congress  has  not  and  ought 
not  to  have  it.  As  a  large  portion  of  Congress,  and  probably  a  majority, 
believes  the  power  to  exist,  it  must  be  evident,  if  I  am  right  in  supposing 
that  any  considerable  number  of  that  majority  would  vote  against  an 
amendment  which  they  do  not  believe  necessary,  that  any  attempt  to 
amend  would  fail.  Considering,  as  I  do,  the  existence  of  the  power  as  of 
the  first  importance,  not  merely  to  the  preservation  of  the  Union  of  the 
States,  paramount  as  that  consideration  ever  should  be  over  all  others,  but 
to  the  prosperity  of  every  great  interest  of  the  country,  agriculture,  man- 
ufactures, commerce,  in  peace  and  in  war,  it  becomes  us  solemnly,  and  de- 
liberately, and  anxiously,  to  examine  the  Constitution,  and  not  to  surrender 
it,  if  fairly  to  be  collected  from  a  just  interpretation  of  that  instrument. 

With  regard  to  the  alarm  sought  to  be  created,  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
power,  by  bringing  up  the  old  theme  of  "  State  rights,"  I  would  observe 
that  if  the  illustrious  persons  just  referred  to  are  against  us  in  the  con- 
struction of  the  Constitution,  they  are  on  our  side  as  to  the  harmless  and 
beneficial  character  of  the  power.  For  it  is  not  to  be  conceived,  that  each 
of  them  would  have  recommended  an  amendment  to  the  Constitution,  if 
they  believed  that  the  possession  of  such  a  power,  by  the  general  govern- 
ment, would  be  detrimental,  much  less  dangerous,  to  the  independence  and 
liberties  of  the  States.  What  real  ground  is  there  for  this  alarm  ?  Gen- 
tlemen have  not  condescended  to  show  how  the  subversion  of  the  rights 
of  the  States  is  to  follow  from  the  exercise  of  the  power  of  internal  im- 
provements by  the  general  government.     We  contend  for  the  power  to 


118  SPEECHES   OF   HENKT   CLAY. 

make  roads  and  canals,  to  distribute  the  intelligence,  force,  and  productions 
of  the  country,  through  all  its  parts  ;  and  for  such  jurisdiction  only  over 
thern,  as  is  necessary  to  their  preservation  from  wanton  injury  and  from 
gradual  decay.  Suppose  such  a  power  is  sustained  and  in  full  operation  ; 
imagine  it  to  extend  to  every  canal  made,  or  proposed  to  he  made,  and  to 
every  post-road ;  how  inconsiderable  and  insignificant  is  the  power  in  a 
political  point  of  view,  limited  as  it  is,  with  regard  to  place  and  to  pur- 
pose, when  contrasted  with  the  great  mass  of  powers  retained  by  the  State 
sovereignties !  "What  a  small  subtraction  from  the  mass !  Even  upon 
these  roads  and  canals,  the  State  governments,  according  to  our  principles, 
will  still  exercise  jurisdiction  over  every  possible  case  arising  upon  them, 
whether  of  crime  or  of  contract,  or  any  other  human  transaction,  except 
only  what  immediately  affects  their  existence  and  preservation.  Thus  de- 
fined, thus  limited,  and  stripped  of  all  factitious  causes  of  alarm,  I  will 
appeal  to  the  candor  of  gentleman  to  say,  if  the  power  really  presents  any 
thino-  frightful  in  it  ?  With  respect  to  post-roads,  our  adversaries  admit 
the  right  of  way  in  the  general  government.  There  have  been,  however, 
on  this  question,  some  instances  of  conflict,  but  they  have  passed  away 
without  any  serious  difficulty.  Connecticut,  if  I  have  been  rightly  in- 
formed, disputed,  at  one  period,  the  right  of  passage  of  the  mail  on  the 
Sabbath.  The  general  government  persisted  in  the  exercise  of  the  right, 
and  Connecticut  herself,  and  every  body  else,  have  acquiesced  in  it. 

The  gentleman  from  Virginia  (Mr.  H.  Nelson)  has  contended,  that  I  do 
not  adhere,  in  the  principles  of  construction  which  I  apply  to  the  Consti- 
tution, to  the  republican  doctrines  of  1798,  of  which  that  gentleman  would 
have  us  believe  he  is  the  constant  disciple.  Let  me  call  the  attention  of 
the  committee  to  the  celebrated  state  paper  to  which  we  both  refer  for 
our  principles  in  this  respect — (a  paper  which,  although  I  have  not  seen  it 
for  sixteen  years  until  tho  gentleman  had  the  politeness  to  furnish  me 
with  it  during  this  debate,  made  such  an  impression  on  my  mind,  that  I 
shall  never  forget  the  satisfaction  with  which  I  perused  it.)  I  find  that  I 
have  used,  without  having  been  aware  of  it,  when  I  formerly  addressed 
the  committee,  almost  the  same  identical  language  employed  by  Mr.  Mad- 
ison in  that  paper.  It  will  be  recollected,  that  I  claimed  no  right  tu  ex- 
ercise any  power  under  the  Constitution,  unless  such  power  was  expressly 
granted,  or  necessary  and  proper  to  carry  into  effect  some  granted  power. 
I  have  not  sought  to  derive  power  from  the  clause  which  authorizes  Con- 
gress to  appropriate  money.  I  have  been  contented  with  endeavoring  to 
show,  that  according  to  the  doctrines  of  1798,  and  according  to  the  most 
rigid  interpretation  which  any  one  will  put  upon  the  instrument,  it  is  ex- 
pressly given  in  one  case,  and  fairly  deducible  in  others. 

It  will  be  remarked,  that  Mr.  Madison,  in  his  reasoning  on  the  Constitu- 
tion, has  not  employed  the  language  fashionable  during  this  debate ;  he 
has  not  said,  that  an  implied  power  must  be  absolutely  necessary  to  carry 
into  effect  the  specified  power,  to  which  it  is  appurtenant,  to  enable  the 


ON  INTERNAL  IMPROVEMENT.  119 

general  government  to  exercise  it.  No.  This  was  a  modern  interpreta- 
tion of  the  Constitution.  Mr.  Madison  has  employed  the  language  of  the 
instrument  itself,  and  has  only  contended  that  the  implied  power  must  be 
necessary  and  proper  to  carry  into  effect  the  specified  power.  He  has 
only  insisted,  that  when  Congress  applied  its  sound  judgment  to  the  Consti- 
tution in  relation  to  implied  powers,  it  should  be  clearly  seen  that  they  were 
necessary  and  proper  to  effectuate  the  specified  powers.  These  are  my 
principles  ;  but  they  are  not  those  of  the  gentleman  from  Virginia  and  his 
friends  on  this  occasion.  They  contend  for  a  degree  of  necessity  absolute 
and  indispensable  ;  that  by  no  possibility  can  the  power  be  otherwise  ex- 
ecuted. 

That  there  are  two  classes  of  powers  in  the  Constitution,  I  believe  has 
never  been  controverted  by  an  American  statesman.  We  can  not  foresee 
and  provide  specifically  for  all  contingencies.  Man  and  his  language  are 
both  imperfect.  Hence  the  existence  of  construction,  and  of  constructive 
powers.  Hence  also  the  rule  that  a  grant  of  the  end  is  a  grant  of  the 
means.  If  you  amend  the  Constitution  a  thousand  times,  the  same  imper- 
fection of  our  nature  and  our  lansaiao-e  will  attend  our  new  works.  There 
are  two  dangers  to  which  we  are  exposed.  The  one  is,  that  the  general 
government  may  relapse  into  the  debility  which  existed  in  the  old  confed- 
eration, and  finally  disolve  from  the  want  of  cohesion.  The  denial  to  it  of 
powers  plainly  conferred,  or  clearly  necessary  and  proper  to  execute  the 
conferred  powers,  may  produce  this  effect.  And  I  think,  with  great  defer- 
ence to  the  gentlemen  on  the  other  side,  this  is  the  danger  to  which  their 
principles  directly  tend.  The  other  danger,  that  of  consolidation,  is,  by  the 
assumption  of  powers  not  granted,  nor  incident  to  granted  powers,  or  the 
assumption  of  powers  which  have  been  withheld  or  expressly  prohibited 
This  was  the  danger  of  the  period  of  1798-9.  For  instance,  that,  in  direct 
contradictien  to  a  prohibitory  clause  of  the  Constitution,  a  sedition  act  was 
passed  ;  and  an  alien  law  was  also  passed,  in  equal  violation  of  the  spirit, 
if  not  of  the  express  provisions,  of  the  Constitution.  It  was  by  such 
measures  that  the  federal  party  (if  parties  might  be  named),  throwing  off 
the  vail,  furnished  to  their  adversaries  the  most  effectual  ground  of  opposi- 
tion. If  they  had  not  passed  those  acts,  I  think  it  highly  probable  that 
the  current  of  power  would  have  continued  to  flow  in  the  same  channel ; 
and  the  change  of  parties  in  1801,  so  auspicious  to  the  best  interests  of  the 
country,  as  I  believe,  would  never  have  occurred. 

I  beg  the  committee — I  entreat  the  true  friends  of  the  confederated 
union  of  these  States  —  to  examine  this  doctrine  of  State  rights,  and  to  see 
to  what  abusive,  if  not  dangerous  consequences,  it  may  lead,  to  what  ex- 
tent it  has  been  carried,  and  how  it  has  varied  by  the  same  State  at  different 
times.  In  alluding  to  the  State  of  Massachusetts,  I  assure  the  gentlemen 
from  that  State,  and  particularly  the  honorable  chairman  of  the  committee 
to  whom  the  claim  of  Massachusetts  has  been  referred,  that  I  have  no  in- 
tention to  create  any  prejudice  against  that  claim.     I  hope  that  when  the 


120  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

subject  is  taken  up  it  will  be  candidly  and  dispassionately  considered,  and 
tbat  a  decision  will  be  made  on  it  consistent  with  the  rights  of  the  Union 
and  of  the  State  of  Massachusetts.  The  high  character,  amiable  disposi- 
tion, and  urbanity  of  the  gentleman  to  whom  I  have  alluded  (Mr.  Mason, 
of  Massachusetts),  will,  if  I  had  been  otherwise  inclined,  prevent  me  from 
endeavoring  to  make  impressions  unfavorable,  to  the  claim,  whose  justice  that 
gentleman  stands  pledged  to  manifest.  But  in  the  period  of  1798-9,  what 
was  the  doctrine  promulgated  by  Massachusetts  ?  It  was,  that  the  States,  in 
their  sovereign  capacity,  had  no  right  to  examine  into  the  constitutionality 
or  expediency  of  the  measures  of  the  general  government. 

[Mr  Clay  here  quoted  several  passages  from  the  answer  of  the  State  of  Mas- 
sachusetts to  the  Virginia  and  Kentucky  resolutions,  concerning  the  alien  and 
sedition  laws,  to  prove  his  position.] 

We  see  here  an  express  disclaimer,  on  the  part  of  Massachusetts,  of  any 
right  to  decide  on  the  constitutionality  or  expediency  of  the  general  govern- 
ment.    But  what  was  the  doctrine  which  the  same  State,  in  1813,  thought 
proper  to  proclaim  to  the  world,  and  that,  too,  when  the  Union  was  men- 
anced  on  all  sides  ?     She  not  only  claimed  but  exercised  the  right  which, 
in  1799,  she  had  so  solemnly  disavowed.     She  claimed  the  right  to  judge 
of  the  propriety  of  the  call  made  by  the  general  government  for  her  militia, 
and  she  refused  the  militia  called  for.     There  is  so  much  plausibility  in 
the  reasoning  employed  by  that  State  in  support  of  her  modern  doctrine  of 
State  rights,  that,  were  it  not  for  the  unpopularity  of  the  stand  she  took  in 
the  late  war,  or  had  it  been  in  other  times,  and  under  other  circumstances, 
she  would  very  probably  have  escaped  a  great  portion  of  that  odium  which 
has  so  justly  fallen  to  her  lot.    The  Constitution  gives  to  Congress  power  to 
provide  for  calling  out  the  militia  to  execute  the  laws  of  the  Union,  to  sup- 
press insurrections,  and  to  repel  invasions ;  and  in  no  other  cases.     The 
militia  was  called  out  by  the  general  government  during  the  late  war,  to 
repel  invasions.     Massachusetts  said,  as  you  have  no  right  to  the  militia, 
but  in  certain  contingencies,  she  was  competent  to  decide  whether  those 
contingencies  had  or  had  not  occurred.     And,  having  examined  the  facts, 
what  then  ?     She  said,  all  was  peace  and  quietness  in  Massachusetts — no 
non-execution  of  the  laws ;  no  insurrection  at  home ;  no  invasion  from 
abroad,  nor  any  immediate  danger  of  invasion.     And,  in  truth,  I  believe 
there  was  no  actual  invasion  for  nearly  two  years  after  the  requisition. 
Under  these  circumstances,  were  it  not  for  the  supposed  motive  of  her 
conduct,  would  not  the  case  which  Massachusetts  made  out  have  looked 
extremely  plausible  %     I  hope  it  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  say,  that  it  is 
very  far  from  my  intention  to  convey  any  thing  like  approbation  of  the 
conduct  of  Massachusetts.     No.     My  doctrine  is,  that  the  States,  as  States, 
have  no  right  to  oppose  the  execution  of  the  powers  which  the  general 
government  asserts.     Any  State  has  undoubtedly  the  right  to  express  its 
opinion,  in  the  form  of  resolution  or  otherwise,  and  proceed,  by  constitu- 


ON  INTERNAL  IMPROVEMENT.  121 

tional  means,  to  redress  any  real  or  imaginary  grievance ;  but  it  has  no 
right  to  withhold  its  military  aid,  when  called  upon  by  the  high  authorities 
of  the  general  government,  much  less  to  obstruct  the  execution  of  a  law  regu- 
larly passed.  To  suppose  the  existence  of  such  an  alarming  right,  is  to  sup- 
pose, if  not  disunion  itself,  such  a  state  of  disorder  and  confusion  as  must  in- 
evitably lead  to  it. 

Greatly  as  I  venerate  the  State  which  gave  me  birth,  and  much  as  I  re- 
spect the  judges  of  its  Supreme  Court,  several  of  whom  are  my  personal 
friends,  I  am  obliged  to  think  that  some  of  the  doctrines  which  that' State 
has  recently  held  concerning  State  rights,  are  fraught  with  much  danger. 
K  those  doctrines  had  been  asserted  during  the  late  war,  a  large  share  of 
the  public  disapprobation  which  has  been  given  to  Massachusetts  would 
have  fallen  to  Virginia.  What  are  these  doctrines  ?  The  courts  of  Vir 
ginia  assert,  that  they  have  a  right  to  determine  on  the  constitutionality 
of  any  law  or  treaty  of  the  United  States,  and  to  exponnd  them  according 
to  their  own  views,  even  if  they  should  vary  from  the  decision  of  the  Su- 
preme Court  of  the  United  States.  They  assert  more — that  from  their  de- 
cision there  can  be  no  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States ; 
and  that  there  exists  in  Congress  no  power  to  frame  a  law,  obliging  the  court 
of  the  State,  in  the  last  resort,  to  submit  its  decision  to  the  supervision 
of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  ;  or,  if  I  do  not  misunderstand  the 
doctrine,  to  withdraw  from  the  State  tribunal,  controversies  involving  the 
laws  of  the  United  States,  and  to  place  them  before  the  federal  judiciary.  I 
am  a  friend,  a  true  friend,  to  State  rights ;  but  not  in  all  cases  as  they  are 
asserted.  The  States  have  their  appointed  orbit ;  so  has  the  Union  ;  and 
each  should  be  confined  within  its  fair,  legitimate,  and  constitutional  sphere. 
We  should  equally  avoid  that  subtle  process  of  argument  which  dissipates 
into  air  the  powers  of  this  government,  and  that  spirit  of  encroachment 
which  would  snatch  from  the  State,  powers  not  delegated  to  the  general 
government.  We  shall  thus  escape  both  the  dangers  I  have  noticed — that 
of  relapsing  into  the  alarming  weakness  of  the  confederation,  which  is  de- 
scribed as  a  mere  rope  of  sand ;  and  also  that  other,  perhaps  not  the 
greatest  danger,  consolidation.  No  man  deprecates  more  than  I  do,  the 
idea  of  consolidation ;  yet,  between  separation  and  consolidation,  painful 
as  would  be  the  alternative,  I  would  greatly  prefer  the  latter. 

I  will  now  proceed  to  endeavor  to  discover  the  real  difference  in  the 
interpretation  of  the  Constitution  between  the  gentlemen  on  the  other  side 
and  myself.  It  is  agreed,  that  there  is  no  power  in  the  general  govern- 
ment but  that  which  is  expressly  granted,  or  which  is  impliable  from  an 
express  grant.  The  difference,  then,  must  be  in  the  application  of  this 
rule.  The  gentleman  from  Virginia,  who  has  favored  the  House  with  so 
able  an  argument  on  the  subject,  has  conceded,  though  somewhat  reluc- 
tantly, the  existence  of  incidental  powers,  but  he  contended  that  they  must 
have  a  direct  and  necessary  relation  to  some  specified  power.  Granted. 
But  who  is  to  judge  of  this  relation  ?     And  what  rule  can  you  prescribe 


122  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

different  from  that  which  the  Constitution  has  required,  that  it  should  be 
necessary  and  proper  ?  Whatever  may  be  the  rule,  in  whatever  language 
you  may  choose  to  express  it,  there  must  be  a  certain  degree  of  discretion 
left  to  the  agent  who  is  to  apply  it.  But  gentlemen  are  alarmed  at  this 
discretion — that  law  of  tyrants,  on  which  they  contend  there  is  no  limit- 
ation. It  should  be  observed,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  gentlemen  are 
brought,  by  the  very  course  of  reasoning  which  they  themselves  employ, 
by  all  the  rules  which  they  would  lay  down  for  the  Constitution,  to  cases 
where  discretion  must  exist.  But  is  there  no  limitation,  no  security,  against 
the  abuse  of  it  ?  Yes,  there  is  such  security  in  the  fact  of  our  being  mem- 
bers of  the  same  society,  equally  affected  ourselves  by  the  laws  we  promul- 
gate. There  is  the  further  security  in  the  oath  which  is  taken  to  support 
the  Constitution,  and  which  will  tend  to  restrain  Congress  from  deriving 
powers  which  are  not  proper  and  necessary.  There  is  the  yet  further  se- 
curity, that  at  the  end  of  every  two  years,  the  members  must  be  amenable 
to  the  people  for  the  manner  in  which  their  trusts  have  been  performed. 
And  there  remains  also  that  further,  though  awful  security,  the  last  resort 
of  society,  which  I  contend  belongs  alike  to  the  people  and  to  the  States 
in  their  sovereign  capacity,  to  be  exercised  in  extreme  cases,  and  when  op- 
pression becomes  intolerable,  the  right  of  resistance.  Take  the  gentleman's 
own  doctrine  (Mr.  Barbour),  the  most  restricted  which  has  been  asserted, 
and  what  other  securities  have  we  against  the  abuse  of  power,  than  those 
which  I  have  enumerated  ?  Say  that  there  must  be  an  absolute  necessity 
to  justify  the  exercise  of  an  implied  power,  who  is  to  define  that  absolute 
necessity,  and  then  to  apply  it  ?  Who  is  to  be  the  judge  ?  Where  is  the 
security  against  transcending  that  limit  ?  The  rule  the  gentleman  con- 
tends for  has  no  greater  security  than  that  insisted  upon  by  us.  It  equally 
leads  to  the  same  discretion,  a  sound  discretion,  exercised  under  all  the 
responsibility  of  a  solemn  oath,  of  a  regard  to  our  fair  fame,  of  a  knowl- 
edge that  we  are  ourselves  the  subjects  of  those  laws  which  we  pass,  and, 
lastly,  of  the  right  of  resisting  insupportable  tyranny.  And,  by  way  of 
illustration,  if  the  sedition  act  had  not  been  condemned  by  the  indignant 
voice  of  the  community,  the  right  of  resistance  would  have  accrued.  If 
Congress  assumed  the  power  to  control  the  right  of  speech,  and  to  assail, 
by  penal  statutes,  the  greatest  of  all  the  bulwarks  of  liberty,  the  freedom 
of  the  press,  and  there  were  no  other  means  to  arrest  their  progress  but 
that  to  which  I  have  referred,  lamentable  as  would  be  the  appeal,  such  a 
monstrous  abuse  of  power,  I  contend,  would  authorize  a  recurrence  to 
that  right. 

If,  then,  the  gentlemen  on  the  other  side  and  myself  differ  so  little  in 
our  general  principles,  as  I  think  I  have  shown,  I  will  proceed,  for  a  few 
moments,  to  look  at  the  Constitution  a  little  more  in  detail.  I  have  con- 
tended that  the  power  to  construct  post-roads  is  expressly  granted  in  the 
power  to  establish  post-roads.  If  it  be,  there  is  an  end  of  the  controversy ; 
but  if  not  the  next  inquiry  is,  whether  that  power  may  be  fairly  deduced, 


ON  INTERNAL  IMPROVEMENT.  123 

by  implication,  from  any  of  the  special  grants  of  power.  To  show  that 
the  power  is  expressly  granted,  I  might  safely  appeal  to  the  arguments  al- 
ready used,  to  prove  that  the  word  establish,  in  this  case,  can  mean  only 
one  thing — the  right  of  making.  Several  gentlemen  have  contended  that 
the  word  has  a  different  sense  ;  and  one  has  resorted  to  the  preamble  of 
the  Constitution,  to  show  that  the  phrase  "to  establish  justice,"  there  used, 
does  not  convey  the  power  of  creation.  If  the  word  "  establish"  is  there 
to  be  taken  in  the  sense  which  gentlemen  claim  for  it,  that  of  adoption  or 
designation,  Congress  could  have  a  choice  only  of  systems  of  justice  pre- 
existing. Will  any  gentleman  contend  that  we  are  obliged  to  take  the 
Justinian  code,  the  Napoleon  code,  the  code  of  civil,  or  the  code  of  com- 
mon, or  canon  law  ?  Establishment  means  in  the  preamble,  as  in  other 
cases,  construction,  formation,  creation.  Let  me  ask,  in  all  cases  of  crime, 
which  are  merely  malum  prohibitum,  if  you  do  not  resort  to  construction, 
to  creating,  when  you  make  the  offense  ?  By  your  laws  denouncing  cer- 
tain acts  as  criminal  offenses,  laws  which  the  good  of  society  requires  you 
to  pass,  and  to  adapt  to  our  peculiar  condition,  you  do  construct  and  create 
a  system  of  rules  to  be  administered  by  the  judiciary.  But  gentlemen  say 
that  the  word  can  not  mean  make;  that  you  would  not  say,  for  example, 
to  establish  a  ship,  to  establish  a  chair.  In  the  application  of  this,  as  of 
all  other  terms,  you  must  be  guided  by  the  nature  of  the  subject ;  and  if  it 
can  not  properly  be  used  in  all  cases,  it  does  not  follow  that  it  can  not  be 
in  any.  And  when  we  take  into  consideration  that,  under  the  old  articles 
of  confederation,  Congress  had  over  the  subject  of  post-roads  just  as  much 
power  as  geutlemen  allow  to  the  existing  government,  that  it  was  the 
general  scope  and  spirit  of  the  new  Constitution  to  enlarge  the  powers  of 
the  general  government,  and  that,  in  fact,  in  this  very  clause,  the  power  to 
establish  post-offices,  which  was  alone  possessed  by  the  former  government, 
I  think  I  may  safely  consider  the  argument,  on  this  part  of  the  subject,  as 
successfully  maintained.  With  respect  to  military  roads,  the  concession 
that  they  may  be  made  when  called  for  by  the  emergency,  is  admitting 
that  the  Constitution  conveys  the  power.  And  we  may  safely  appeal  to 
the  judgment  of  the*  candid  and  enlightened  to  decide  between  the  wisdom 
of  these  two  constructions,  of  which  one  requires  you  to  wait  for  the  ex- 
ercise of  your  power  until  the  arrival  of  an  emergency,  which  may  not 
allow  you  to  exert  it,  and  the  other,  without  denying  you  the  power,  if 
you  can  exercise  it  during  the  emergency,  claims  the  right  of  providing 
beforehand  against  the  emergency. 

One  member  has  stated  what  appeared  to  him  a  conclusive  argument 
against  the  power  to  cut  canals,  that  he  had  understood  that  a  proposition, 
made  in  the  convention  to  insert  such  power,  was  rejected.  To  this  argu- 
ment more  than  one  sufficient  answer  can  be  made.  In  the  first  place,  the 
fact  itself  has  been  denied,  and  I  have  never  yet  seen  any  evidence  of  it. 
But  suppose  that  the  proposition  had  been  made  and  overruled,  unless  the 
motives  of  the  refusal  to  insert  it  are  known,  gentlemen  are  not  authorized 


124  SPEECHES  OF    HENRY   CLAY. 

to  draw  the  inference  that  it  was  from  hostility  to  the  power,  or  from  ? 
desire  to  withhold  it  from  Congress.  May  not  one  of  the  objections  be. 
that  the  power  was  fairly  to  be  inferred  from  some  of  the  specific  grants 
of  power,  and  that  it  was  therefore  not  necessary  to  insert  the  proposition  ? 
that  to  adopt  it,  indeed,  might  lead  to  weaken  or  bring  into  doubt  other 
incidental  powers  not  enumerated  ?  A  member  from  New  York  (Mr. 
Storrs),  whose  absence  I  regret  on  this  occasion,  not  only  on  account  of 
the  great  aid  which  might  have  been  expected  from  him,  but  from  the 
cause  of  that  absence,  has  informed  me  that,  in  the  convention  of  that 
State,  one  of  the  objections  to  the  Constitution  by  the  anti-federalists  was, 
that  it  was  understood  to  convey  to  the  general  government  the  power  to 
cut  canals.  How  often,  in  the  course  of  the  proceedings  of  this  House,  do 
we  reject  amendments  upon  the  sole  ground  that  they  are  not  necessary, 
the  principle  of  the  amendment  being  already  contained  in  the  proposi- 
tion ? 

I  refer  to  the  "  Federalist,"  for  one  moment,  to  show  that  the  only  notice 
taken  of  that  clause  of  the  Constitution  which  relates  to  post-roads,  is  fa- 
vorable to  my  construction.  The  power,  that  book  says,  must  always  be 
a  harmless  one.  I  have  endeavored  to  show,  not  only  that  it  is  perfectly 
harmless,  but  that  every  exercise  of  it  must  be  necessarily  beneficial. 
Nothing  which  tends  to  facilitate  intercourse  among  the  States,  says  the 
"  Federalist,"  can  be  unworthy  of  the  public  care.  What  intercourse  ?  Even 
if  restricted  on  the  narrowest  theory  of  gentlemen  on  the  other  side,  to 
the  intercourse  of  intelligence,  they  deny  that  to  us,  since  they  will  not 
admit  that  we  have  the  power  to  repair  or  improve  the  way,  the  right  of 
which  they  yield  us.  In  a  more  liberal  and  enlarged  sense  of  the  word, 
it  will  comprehend  all  those  various  means  of  accomplishing  the  object 
which  are  calculated  to  render  us  a  homogeneous  people — one  in  feeling, 
in  interest,  and  affection ;  as  we  are  one  in  our  political  relation. 

Is  there  not  a  direct  and  intimate  relation  between  the  power  to  make 
war,  and  military  roads  and  canals  ?  It  is  in  vain  that  the  convention  have 
confided  to  the  general  government  the  tremendous  power  of  declaring 
war  ;  have  imposed  upon  it  the  duty  to  employ  the  whole  physical  means 
of  the  nation  to  render  the  war,  whatever  may  be  its  character,  successful 
and  glorious ;  if  the  power  is  withheld  of  transporting  and  distributing 
those  means.  Let  us  appeal  to  facts,  which  are  sometimes  worth  volumes 
of  theory.  We  have  recently  had  a  war  raging  on  all  the  four  quarters 
of  the  Union.  The  only  circumstance  which  gave  me  pain  at  the  close  of 
that  war,  the  detention  of  Moose  Island,  would  not  have  occurred,  if  we 
had  possessed  military  roads.  Why  did  not  the  Union,  why  did  not  Mas- 
sachusetts, make  a  struggle  to  reconquer  the  island  ?  Not  for  the  want 
of  men ;  not  for  the  want  of  patriotism,  I  hope  ;  but  from  the  want  of 
physical  ability  to  march  a  force  sufficient  to  dislodge  the  enemy.  On 
the  north-western  frontier,  millions  of  money,  and  some  of  the  most  pre- 
cious blood  of  the  State  from  which  I  have  the  honor  to  come,  were  waste- 


ON  INTEKNAL  IMPROVEMENT.  125 

fully  expended  for  the  want  of  such  roads.  My  honorable  friend  from 
Ohio  (General  Harrison),  who  commanded  the  army  in  that  quarter,  could 
furnish  a  volume  of  evidence  on  this  subject.  What  now  paralyzes  our 
arms  on  the  southern  frontier,  and  occasioned  the  recent  massacre  of  fifty 
of  our  brave  soldiers  ?  What,  but  the  want  of  proper  means  for  the  com- 
munication of  intelligence,  and  for  the  transportation  of  our  resources 
from  point  to  point  ?  Whether  we  refer  to  our  own  experience,  or  that 
of  other  countries,  we  can  not  fail  to  perceive  the  great  value  of  military 
roads.  Those  great  masters  of  the  world,  the  Romans,  how  did  they  sus- 
tain their  power  so  many  centuries,  diffusing  law  and  liberty,  and  intelli- 
gence, all  around  them  ?  They  made  permanent  military  roads ;  and 
among  the  objects  of  interest  which  Europe  now  presents  are  the  remains 
of  those  Roman  roads,  which  are  shown  to  the  curious  inquirer.  If  there 
were  no  other  monument  remaining  of  the  sagacity  and  of  the  illustrious 
deeds  of  the  unfortunate  captive  of  St.  Helena,  the  internal  improvements 
which  he  made,  the  road  from  Hamburg  to  Basle,  would  perpetuate  his 
memory  to  future  ages.  In  making  these  allusions,  let  me  not  be  misun- 
derstood. I  do  not  desire  to  see  military  roads  established  for  the  purpose 
of  conquest,  but  of  defense  ;  and  as  a  part  of  that  preparation  which 
should  be  made  in  a  season  of  peace  for  a  season  of  war.  I  do  not  wish 
to  see  this  country  ever  in  that  complete  state  of  preparation  for  war  for 
which  some  contend  ;  that  is,  that  we  should  constantly  have  a  large 
standing  army,  well  disciplined,  and  always  ready  to  act.  I  want  to  see 
the  bill  reported  by  my  friend  from  Ohio,  or  some  other,  embracing  an  ef- 
fective militia  system,  passed  into  a  law  ;  and  a  chain  of  roads  and  canals, 
by  the  aid  of  which  our  physical  means  can  be  promptly  transported  to 
any  required  point.  These,  connected  with  a  small  military  establishment 
to  keep  up  our  forts  and  garrisons,  constitute  the  kind  of  preparation  for 
war,  which,  it  appears  to  me,  this  country  ought  to  make.  No  man,  who 
has  paid  the  least  attention  to  the  operations  of  modern  war,  can  have 
failed  to  remark  how  essential  good  roads  and  canals  are  to  the  success  of 
those  operations.  How  often  have  battles  been  won  by  celerity  and  rap- 
idity of  movement !  It  is  one  of  the  most  essential  circumstances  in  war. 
But,  without  good  roads,  it  is  impossible.  Members  will  recall  to  their 
recollections  the  fact,  that,  in  the  Senate,  several  years  ago,  an  honorable 
friend  of  mine  (Mr.  Bayard),  whose  premature  death  I  shall  ever  deplore, 
who  was  an  ornament  to  the  councils  of  his  country,  and  who,  when 
abroad,  was  the  able  and  fearless  advocate  of  her  rights,  did,  in  supporting 
a  subscription  which  he  proposed  the  United  States  Bank  should  make  to 
the  stock  of  the  Delaware  and  Chesapeake  Canal  Company,  earnestly  rec- 
ommend the  measure  as  connected  with  our  operations  in  Avar.  I  listened 
to  my  friend  with  some  incredulity,  and  thought  he  pushed  his  argument 
too  far.  I  had,  soon  after,  a  practical  evidence  of  its  justness.  For,  in 
traveling  from  Philadelphia,  in  the  fall  of  1813,  I  saw  transporting,  from 
Elk  river  to  the  Delaware,  large  quantities  of  massy  timbers  for  the  con- 


126  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

struction  of  the  Guerriere  or  the  Franklin,  or  both  ;  and,  judging  from 
the  number  of  wagons  and  horses,  and  the  number  of  days  employed,  I 
believe  the  additional  expense  of  that  single  operation  would  have  gone 
very  far  to  complete  that  canal,  whose  cause  was  espoused  with  so  much 
eloquence  in  the  Senate,  and  with  so  much  effect,  too ;  bills  having  pass- 
ed that  body  more  than  once  to  give  aid,  in  some  shape  or  other,  to  that 
canal.  With  notorious  facts  like  this,  is  it  not  obvious,  that  a  line  of  mili- 
tary canals  is  not  only  necessary  and  proper,  but  almost  indispensable  to 
the  war-making  power  ? 

One  of  the  rules  of  construction  which  has  been  laid  down,  I  acknowl- 
edge my  incapacity  to  comprehend.  Gentlemen  say,  that  the  power  in 
question  is  a  substantive  power ;  and  that  no  substantive  power  can  be 
derived  by  implication.  What  is  their  definition  of  a  substantive  power  ? 
Will  they  favor  us  with  the  principle  of  discrimination  between  powers 
which,  being  substantive,  are  not  grantable  but  by  express  grant,  and 
those  which,  not  being  substantive,  may  be  conveyed  by  implication  ? 
Although  I  do  not  perceive  why  this  power  is  more  entitled  than  many 
implied  powers,  to  the  denomination  of  substantive,  suppose  that  be 
yielded,  how  do  gentlemen  prove  that  it  may  not  be  conveyed  by  implica- 
tion ?  If  the  positions  were  maintained,  which  have  not  yet  been  proved, 
that  the  power  is  substantive,  and  that  no  substantive  power  can  be 
implied,  yet  I  trust  it  has  been  satisfactorily  shown  that  there  is  an  express 
grant. 

My  honorable  friend  from  Virginia  (Mr.  Nelson),  has  denied  the  oper- 
ation of  executive  influence  on  his  mind  ;  and  has  informed  the  committee, 
that  from  that  quarter  he  has  nothing  to  expect,  to  hope,  or  to  fear.  I  did 
not  impute  to  my  honorable  friend  any  such  motive ;  I  knew  his  inde- 
pendence of  character  and  of  mind  too  well  to  do  so.  But  I  entreat  him 
to  reflect,  if  he  does  not  expose  himself  to  such  an  imputation  by  those 
less  friendly  disposed  toward  him  than  myself.  Let  us  look  a  little  at 
facts.  The  president  recommends  the  establishment  of  a  bank.  If  ever 
there  were  a  stretch  of  implied  powers  conveyed  by  the  Constitution,  it 
has  been  thought  that  the  grant  of  the  charter  of  the  national  bank  was 
one.  But  the  president  recommends  it.  Where  was  then  my  honorable 
friend,  the  friend  of  State  rights,  who  so  pathetically  calls  upon  us  to  re- 
pent, in  sackcloth  and  ashes,  our  meditated  violation  of  the  Constitution ; 
and  who  kindly  expresses  his  hope,  that  we  shall  be  made  to  feel  the  pub- 
lic indignation  ?  Where  was  he  at  that  awful  epoch  ?  Where  was  that 
eloquent  tongue,  which  wo  have  now  heard  with  so  much  pleasure  ? 
Silent !     Silent  as  the  grave  ! 

[Mr.  Nelson  said,  across  the  House,  that  he  had  voted  against  the  bank  bill 
when  first  recommended.] 

Alas  !  my  honorable  friend  had  not  the  heart  to  withstand  a  second  rec- 
ommendation from   the  president ;  but,  when  it  came,  yielded,  no  doubt 


ON  INTERNAL  IMPROVEMENT.  127 

most  reluctantly,  to  the  executive  wishes,  and  voted  for  the  hank.  At  the 
last  session  of  Congress,  Mr.  Madison  recommended  (and  I  will  presently 
make  some  remarks  on  that  subject)  an  exercise  of  all  the  existing  powers 
of  the  general  government,  to  establish  a  comprehensive  system  of  internal 
improvements.  Where  was  my  honorable  friend  on  that  occasion  ?  Not  • 
silent  as  the  grave,  but  he  gave  a  negative  vote,  almost  as  silent.  No 
effort  was  made  on  his  part,  great  as  he  is  when  he  exerts  the  powers  of 
his  well-stored  mind,  to  save  the  commonwealth  from  that  greatest  of  all 
calamities,  a  system  of  internal  improvement.  No  ;  although  a  war  with 
all  the  allies,  he  now  thinks,  would  be  less  terrible  than  the  adoption  of 
this  report,  not  one  word  then  dropped  from  his  lips  against  the  measure.    «, 

[Mr.  Nelson  said  he  voted  against  the  bill.] 

That  he  whispered  out  an  unwilling  negative,  I  do  not  deny ;  but  it  was 
unsustained  by  that  torrent  of  eloquence  which  he  has  poured  out  on  the 
present  occasion.  But  we  have  an  executive  message  now,  not  quite  as 
ambiguous  in  its  terms,  nor  as  oracular  in  its  meaning,  as  that  of  Mr. 
Madison  appears  to  have  been.  No  ;  the  president  now  says,  that  he  has 
made  great  efforts  to  vanquish  his  objections  to  the  power,  and  that  he 
can  not  but  believe  that  it  does  not  exist.  Then  my  honorable  friend 
rouses,  thunders  forth  the  danger  in  which  the  Constitution  is,  and  sounds 
the  tocsin  of  alarm.  Far  from  insinuating  that  he  is  at  all  biased  by  the 
executive  wishes,  I  appeal  to  his  candor  to  say,  if  there  is  not  a  remarkable 
coincidence  between  his  zeal  and  exertions,  and  the  opinions  of  the  chief 
magistrate  ? 

Now  let  us  review  those  opinions  as  communicated  at  different  periods. 
It  was  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Jefferson,  that,  although  there  was  no  general 
power  vested  by  the  Constitution  in  Congress,  to  construct  roads  and 
canals,  without  the  consent  of  the  States,  yet  such  a  power  might  be  exer- 
cised with  their  assent.  Mr.  Jefferson  not  only  held  this  opinion  in  the  • 
abstract,  but  he  practically  executed  it  in  the  instance  of  the  Cumberland 
road  ;  and  how  ?  First,  by  a  compact  made  with  the  State  of  Ohio,  for 
the  application  of  a  specified  fund,  and  then  by  compacts  with  Virginia, 
Pennsylvania,  and  Maryland,  to  apply  the  fund  so  set  apart  within  their 
respective  limits.  If,  however,  I  rightly  understood  my  honorable  friend 
the  other  day,  he  expressly  denied  (and  in  that  I  concur  with  him)  that 
the  power  could  be  acquired  by  the  mere  consent  of  the  State.  Yet  he 
defended  the  act  of  Mr.  Jefferson,  in  the  case  referred  to. 

[Mr.  Nelson  expressed  his  dissent  to  this  statement  of  his  argument.] 

It  is  far  from  my  intention  to  misstate  the  gentleman.  I  certainly  un- 
derstood him  to  say,  that,  as  the  road  was  first  stipulated  for  in  the  com- 
pact with  Ohio,  it  was  competent  afterward  to  carry  it  through  the  States 
mentioned  with  their  assent.     Now,  if  wo  have  not  the  right  to  make  a 


128  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

road  in  virtue  of  one  compact  made  with  a  single  State,  can  we  obtain  it 
by  two  contracts  made  with  several  States  ?  The  character  of  the  fund 
can  not  affect  the  question.  It  is  totally  immaterial  whether  it  arises  from 
the  sales  of  the  public  lands,  or  from  the  general  revenue.  Suppose  a  con- 
tract made  with  Massachusetts,  that  a  certain  portion  of  the  revenue,  col- 
lected at  the  port  of  Boston,  from  foreign  trade,  should  be  expended  in 
making  roads  and  canals  leading  to  that  State,  and  that  a  subsequent  com- 
pact should  be  made  with  Connecticut  or  New  Hampshire,  for  the  expend- 
iture of  the  fund  on  these  objects,  within  their  limits.  Can  we  acquire 
the  power,  in  this  manner,  over  internal  improvements,  if  we  do  not  possess 
it  independently  of  such  compacts?  I  conceive,  clearly  not.  And  I  am 
entirely  at  a  loss  to  comprehend  how  gentlemen,  consistently  with  their  own 
principles,  can  justify  the  erection  of  the  Cumberland  road.  No  man  is 
prouder  than  I  am  of  that  noble  monument  of  the  provident  care  of  the 
nation,  and  of  the  public  spirit  of  its  projectors ;  and  I  trust  that,  in  spite 
of  all  constitutional  and  other  scruples,  here  or  elsewhere,  an  appropriation 
will  be  made  to  complete  that  road.  I  confess,  however,  freely,  that  I  am 
entirely  unable  to  conceive  of  any  principle  on  which  that  road  can  be 
supported,  that  would  not  uphold  the  general  power  contended  for. 

I  will  now  examine  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Madison.  Of  all  the  acts  of  that 
pure,  virtuous,  and  illustrious  statesman,  whose  administration  has  so  pow- 
erfully tended  to  advance  the  glory,  honor,  and  prosperity  of  this  country, 
I  must  regret,  for  his  sake  and  for  the  sake  of  the  country,  the  rejection  of 
the  bill  of  the  last  session.  I  think  it  irreconcilable  with  Mr.  Madison's 
own  principles — those  great,  broad,  and  liberal  principles,  on  which  he  so 
ably  administered  the  government.  And,  sir,  when  I  appeal  to  the  mem- 
bers of  the  last  Congress,  who  are  now  in  my  hearing,  I  am  authorized  to 
say,  with  regard  to  the  majority  of  them,  that  no  circumstances,  not  even 
an  earthquake,  that  should  have  swallowed  up  one  half  of  this  city,  could 
have  excited  more  surprise  than  when  it  was  first  communicated  to  this 
House,  that  Mr.  Madison  had  rejected  his  own  bill — I  say  his  own  bill,  for 
his  message  at  the  opening  of  the  session  meant  nothing,  if  it  did  not  rec- 
ommend such  an  exercise  of  power  as  was  contained  in  that  bill.  My 
friend,  who  is  near  me  (Mr.  Johnson,  of  Virginia),  the  operations  of  whose 
vigorous  and  independent  mind,  depend  upon  his  own  internal  perceptions, 
has  expressed  himself  with  becoming  manliness,  and  thrown  aside  the 
authority  of  names,  as  having  no  bearing  with  him  on  the  question.  But 
their  authority  has  been  referred  to,  and  will  have  influence  with  others. 
It  is  impossible,  moreover,  to  disguise  the  fact,  that  the  question  is  now  a 
question  between  the  executive  on  the  one  side,  and  the  representatives  of 
the  people  on  the  other.  So  it  is  understood  in  the  country,  and  such  is 
the  fact.  Mr.  Madison  enjoys,  in  his  retreat  at  Montpelier,  the  repose  and 
the  honors  due  to  his  eminent  and  laborious  services ;  and  I  would  be 
among  the  last  to  disturb  it.  However  painful  it  is  to  me  to  animadvert 
upon  any  of  his  opinions,  I  feel  perfectly  sure  that  the  circumstance  can 


ON  INTERNAL  IMPROVEMENT.  129 

only  be  viewed  by  him  with  an  enlightened  liberality.  What  are  the 
opinions  which  have  been  expressed  by  Mr.  Madison  on  tbis  subject  ?  I 
will  not  refer  to  all  the  messages  wherein  he  has  recommended  internal 
improvements  ;  but  to  that  alone  which  he  addressed  to  Congress,  at  the 
commencement  of  the  last  session,  which  contains  this  passage  : 

"  I  particularly  invite  again  the  attention  of  Congress  to  the  expediency  of 
exercising  their  existing  powers,  and,  where  necessary,  of  resorting  to  the  pre- 
scribed mode  of  enlarging  them,  in  order  to  effectuate  a  comprehensive  system  of 
roads  and  canals,  such  as  will  have  the  effect  of  drawing  more  closely  together 
every  part  of  our  country,  by  promoting  intercourse  and  improvements,  and 
by  increasing  the  share  of  every  part  in  the  common  stock  of  national  pros- 
perity." 

In  the  examination  of  this  passage,  two  positions  force  themselves  upon 
our  attention.  The  first  is,  the  assertion  that  there  are  existing  powers  in 
Congress  to  effectuate  a  comprehensive  system  of  roads  and  canals,  the  ef- 
fect of  which  would  be  to  draw  the  different  parts  of  the  country  more 
closely  together.  And  I  would  candidly  admit,  in  the  second  place,  that 
it  was  intimated,  that,  in  the  exercise  of  those  existing  powers,  some  defect 
might  be  discovered  which  would  render  an  amendment  of  the  Constitution 
necessary.  Nothing  could  be  more  clearly  affirmed  than  the  first  position  ; 
but  in  the  message  of  Mr.  Madison  returning  the  bill,  passed  in  consequence 
of  his  recommendation,  he  has  not  specified  a  solitary  case  to  which  those 
existing  powers  are  applicable  ;  he  has  not  told  us  what  he  meant  by  those 
existing  powers ;  and  the  general  scope  of  his  reasoning,  in  that  message, 
if  well  founded,  proves  that  there  are  no  existing  powers  whatever.  It  is 
apparent,  that  Mr.  Madison  himself  has  not  examined  some  of  those  prin- 
cipal sources  of  the  Constitution  from  which,  during  this  debate,  the  power 
has  been  derived.  I  deeply  regret,  and  I  know  that  Mr.  Madison  regretted 
that  the  circumstances  under  which  the  bill  was  presented  to  him  (the  last 
day  but  one  of  a  most  busy  session)  deprived  him  of  an  opportunity  of  that 
thorough  investigation  of  which  no  man  is  more  capable.  It  is  certain, 
that,  taking  his  two  messages  at  the  same  session  together,  they  are  per- 
fectly irreconcilable.  What,  moreover,  was  the  nature  of  that  bill  ?  It 
did  not  apply  the  money  to  any  specific  object  of  internal  improvement, 
nor  designate  any  particular  mode  in  which  it  should  be  applied ;  but 
merely  set  apart  and  pledged  the  fund  to  the  general  purpose,  subject  to 
the  future  disposition  of  Congress.  If,  then,  there  were  any  supposable 
case  whatever,  to  which  Congress  might  apply  money  in  the  erection  of  a 
road,  or  cuttino-  a  canal,  the  bill  did  not  violate  the  Constitution.  And 
it  ought  not  to  be  anticipated,  that  money  constitutionally  appropriated  by 
one  Congress  would  be  unconstitutionally  expended  by  another. 

I  come  now  to  the  message  of  Mr.  Monroe ;  and  if,  by  the  communica- 
tion of  his  opinion  to  Congress,  he  intended  to  prevent  discussion,  he  has 
most  wofully  failed.     I  know  that,  according  to  a  most  venerable  and  ex- 

9 


130  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

cellent  usage,  the  opinion,  neither  of  the  president  or  of  the  Senate,  upon 
any  proposition  depending  in  this  House,  ought  to  be  adverted  to.     Even 
in  the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain,  a  member  who  -would  refer  to  the 
opinion  of  the  sovereign,  in  such  a  case,  would  be  instantly  called  to  order ; 
but  under  the  extraordinary  circumstances  of  the  president  having,  with,  I 
have  no  doubt,  the  best  motives,  volunteered  his  opinion  on  this  head,  and 
inverted  the  order  of  legislation  by  beginning  where  it  should  end,  I  am 
compelled,  most  reluctantly,  to  refer  to  that  opinion.     I  can  not  but  depre- 
cate the  practice  of  which  the  president  has,  in  this  instance,  set  the  ex- 
ample to  his  successors.     The  constitutional  order  of  legislation  supposes 
that  every  bill  originating  in  one  House,  shall  be  there  deliberately  investi- 
gated, without  influence  from  any  other  branch  of  the  Legislature  ;  and  then 
remitted  to  the  other  House  for  a  like  free  and  unbiased  consideration. 
Having  passed  both  Houses,  it  is  to  be  laid  before  the  president ;  signed  if 
approved,  and  if  disapproved,  to  be  returned,  with  his  objections,  to  the 
originating  House.     In  this  manner,  entire  freedom  of  thought  and  of 
action  is  secured,  and  the  president  finally  sees  the  proposition  in  the  most 
matured  form  which  Congress  can  give  to  it.     The  practical  effect,  to  say 
no  more,  of  forestalling  the  legislative  opinion,  and  telling  us  what  we  may 
or  may  not  do,  will  be  to  deprive  the  president  himself  of  the  opportunity 
of  considering  a  proposition  so  matured,  and  us  of  the  benefit  of  bis  reason- 
ing applied  specifically  to  such  proposition.     For  the  Constitution  further 
enjoins  it  upon  him,  to  state  his  objections  upon  returning  the  bill.     The 
originating  House  is  then  to  reconsider  it,  and  deliberately  to  weigh  those 
objections  ;  and  it  is  further  required,  when  the  question  is  again  taken, 
Shall  the  bill  pass,  those  objections  notwithstanding  ?  that  the  votes  shall 
be  solemnly  spread,  by  ayes  and  noes,  upon  the  record.     Of  this  oppor- 
tunity of  thus  recording  our  opinions,  in  matters  of  great  public  concern, 
we  are  deprived,  if  we  submit  to  the  innovation  of  the  president.     I  will 
not  press  this  part  of  the  subject  further.     I  repeat,  again  and  again,  that 
I  have  no  doubt  but  that  the  president  was  actuated  by  the  purest  motives. 
I  am  compelled,  however,  in  the  exercise  of  that  freedom  of  opinion  which, 
so  loDg  as  I  exist,  I  will  maintain,  to  say,  that  the  proceeding  is  irregular 
and  unconstitutional.     Let  us,  however,  examine  the  reasoning  and  opinion 
of  the  president : 

"  A  difference  of  opinion  has  existed  from  the  first  formation  of  our  Consti- 
tution to  the  present  time,  among  our  most  enlightened  and  virtuous  citizens 
respecting  the  right  of  Congress  to  establish  a  system  of  internal  improvement 
Talcing  into  view  the  trust  with  which  I  am  now  honored,  it  would  be  improper, 
after  what  has  passed,  that  this  discussion  should  be  revived,  with  an  uncer- 
tainty of  my  opinion  respecting  the  right.  Disregarding  early  impressions,  I 
have  bestowed  on  the  subject  all  the  deliberation  which  its  great  importance 
and  a  just  sense  of  my  duty  required ;  and  the  result  is,  a  settled  conviction  in 
my  mind,  that  Congress  does  not  possess  the  right.  It  is  not  contained  in  any 
of  the  specified  powers  granted  to  Congress ;  nor  can  I  consider  it  incidental 


ON  INTERNAL  IMPROVEMENT.  131 

to,  or  a  necessary  mean,  viewed  on  the  most  liberal  scale,  for  carrying  into 
effect  any  of  the  powers  which  are  specifically  granted.  In  communicating  this 
result,  I  can  not  resist  the  obligation  which  I  feel,  to  suggest  to  Congress  the 
propriety  of  recommending  to  the  States  the  adoption  of  an  amendment  to  the 
Constitution,  which  shall  give  the  right  in  question.  In  cases  of  doubtful  con- 
struction, especially  of  such  vital  interest,  it  comports  with  the  nature  and  origin 
of  our  institutions,  and  will  contribute  much  to  preserve  them,  to  apply  to  our 
constituents  for  an  explicit  grant  of  power.  We  may  confidently  rely,  that,  if 
it  appears  to  their  satisfaction  that  the  power  is  necessary,  it  will  always  be 
granted." 

In  this  passage  the  president  has  furnished  us  with  no  reasoning,  no 
argument  in  support  of  his  opinion — nothing  addressed  to  the  understand- 
ing. He  gives  us,  indeed,  an  historical  account  of  the  operations  of  his 
own  mind,  and  he  asserts  that  he  has  made  a  laborious  effort  to  conquer 
his  early  impressions,  but  that  the  result  is  a  settled  conviction  against 
the  power,  without  a  single  reason.  In  his  position,  that  the  power  must 
be  specifically  granted,  or  incident  to  a  power  so  granted,  it  has  been  seen, 
that  I  have  the  honor  to  entirely  concur  with  him  ;  but,  he  says,  the  power 
is  not  among  the  specified  powers.  Has  he  taken  into  consideration  the 
clause  respecting  post-roads,  and  told  us  how  and  why  that  does  not  con- 
vey the  power  ?  If  he  had  acted  within  what  I  conceive  to  be  his  con- 
stitutional sphere  of  rejecting  the  bill,  after  it  had  passed  both  Houses,  he 
must  have  learned  that  great  stress  was  placed  on  that  clause,  and  we 
should  have  been  enlightened  by  his  comments  upon  it.  As  to  his  denial 
of  the  power,  as  an  incident  to  any  of  the  express  grants,  I  would  have 
thought  that  we  might  have  safely  appealed  to  the  experience  of  the 
president,  during  the  late  war,  when  the  country  derived  so  much  benefit 
from  his  judicious  administration  of  the  duties  of  the  war  department, 
whether  roads  and  canals  for  military  purposes  were  not  essential  to 
celerity  and  successful  result  in  the  operations  of  armies.  This  part  of 
the  message  is  all  assertion,  and  contains  no  argument  which  I  can  com- 
prehend, or  which  meets  the  points  contended  for  during  this  debate. 
Allow  me  here  to  say,  and  I  do  it  without  the  least  disrespect  to  that  branch 
of  the  government  on  whose  opinions  and  acts  it  has  been  rendered  my 
painful  duty  to  comment ;  let  me  say,  in  reference  to  any  man,  however 
elevated  his  station,  even  if  he  be  endowed  with  the  power  and  preroga- 
tives of  a  sovereign,  that  his  acts  are  worth  infinitely  more,  and  are  more 
intelligible  than  mere  paper  sentiments  or  declarations.  And  what  have 
been  the  acts  of  the  president  ?  During  his  tour  of  the  last  summer,  did 
he  not  order  a  road  to  be  cut  or  repaired  from  near  Plattsburg  to  the 
St.  Lawrence  ?  My  honorable  friend  will  excuse  me,  if  my  comprehension 
is  too  dull  to  perceive  the  force  of  that  argument,  which  seeks  to  draw  a 
distinction  between  repairing  an  old  and  making  a  new  road. 

(Mr.  Nelson  said  he  had  not  drawn  that  distinction,  having  only  stated  the  fact.) 


132  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

Certainly  no  such  distinction  is  to  be  found  in  the  Constitution,  or  ex- 
ists in  reason.  Grant,  however,  the  power  of  reparation,  and  we  will  make 
it  do.  We  will  take  the  post-roads,  sinuous  as  they  are,  and  put  them  in 
a  condition  to  enable  the  mails  to  pass,  without  those  mortifying  delays  and 
disappointments,  to  which  we,  at  least  in  the  West,  are  so  often  liable.  The 
president  then  ordered  a  road  of  considerable  extent  to  be  constructed  or 
repaired,  on  his  sole  authority,  in  a  time  of  profound  peace,  when  no  enemy 
threatened  the  country,  and  when,  in  relation  to  the  power  as  to  which 
alone  that  road  could  be  useful  in  time  of  war,  there  exists  the  best  under- 
standing, and  a  prospect  of  lasting  friendship,  greater  than  at  any  other 
period.  On  his  sole  authority  the  president  acted,  and  we  are  already 
called  upon  by  the  Chairman  of  the  Committee  of  Ways  and  Means  to 
sanction  the  act  by  an  appropriation.  This  measure  has  been  taken,  too> 
without  the  consent  of  the  State  of  New  York;  and  what  is  wonderful, 
when  we  consider  the  magnitude  of  the  State  rights  which  are  said  to  be 
violated,  without  even  a  protest  on  the  part  of  that  State  against  it.  On 
the  contrary,  I  understand,  from  some  of  the  military  officers  who  are 
charged  with  the  execution  of  the  work,  what  is  very  extraordinary,  that 
the  people  through  whose  quarter  of  the  country  the  road  passes,  do  not 
view  it  as  a  national  calamity  ;  that  they  would  be  very  glad  that  the 
president  would  visit  them  often,  and  that  he  would  order  a  road  to  be  cut 
and  improved,  at  the  national  expense,  every  time  he  should  visit  them. 
Other  roads,  in  other  parts  of  the  Union,  have,  it  seems,  been  likewise 
ordered,  or  their  execution,  at  the  public  expense,  sanctioned  by  the  ex- 
ecutive, without  the  concurrence  of  Congress.  If  the  president  has  the 
power  to  cause  these  public  improvements  to  be  executed  at  his  pleasure, 
whence  is  it  derived?  If  any  member  will  stand  up  in  his  place  and 
say  the  president  is  clothed  with  this  authority,  and  that  it  is  denied  to 
Congress,  let  us  hear  'from  him  ;  and  let  him  point  to  the  clause  of  the 
Constitution  which  vests  it  in  the  executive  and  withholds  it  from  the  leg- 
islative branch. 

There  is  no  such  clause ;  there  is  no  such  exclusive  executive  power. 
The  power  is  derivable  by  the  executive  only  from  those  provisions  of  the 
Constitution  which  charge  him  with  the  duties  of  commanding  the  phys- 
ical force  of  the  country,  and  the  employment  of  that  force  in  war,  and  the 
preservation  of  the  public  tranquillity,  and  in  the  execution  of  the  laws. 
But  Congress  has  paramount  powers  to  the  president.  It  alone  can  de- 
clare war,  can  raise  armies,  can  provide  for  calling  out  the  militia,  in  the 
specified  instances,  and  can  raise  and  appropriate  the  ways  and  means 
necessary  to  those  objects.  Or  is  it  come  to  this,  that  there  are  to  be  two 
rules  of  construction  for  the  Constitution — one,  an  enlarged  rule  for  the 
executive,  and  another,  a  restricted  rule  for  the  Legislature  ?  Is  it  already 
to  be  held  that,  according  to  the  genius  and  nature  of  our  Constitution, 
powers  of  this  kind  may  be  safely  intrusted  to  the  executive,  but  when  at- 
tempted to  be  exercised  by  the  Legislature,  are  so  alarming  and  dangerous 


ON  INTERNAL  IMPROVEMENT.  133 

that  a  war  with  all  tbe  allied  powers  would  be  less  terrible,  and  that  the- 
nation  should  clothe  itself  straightway  in  sackcloth  and  ashes !  No,  sir  ;  if 
the  power  belongs  only  by  implication  to  the  chief  magistrate,  it  is  placed 
both  by  implication  and  express  grant  in  the  hands  of  Congress.  I  am  so 
far  from  condemning  the  act  of  the  president,  to  which  I  have  referred, 
that  I  think  it  deserving  of  high  approbation.  That  it  was  within  the 
scope  of  his  constitutional  authority,  I  have  no  doubt;  and  I  sincerely 
trust  that  the  Secretary  at  War  will,  in  time  of  peace,  constantly  employ 
in  that  way  the  military  force.  It  will,  at  the  same  time,  guard  that  force 
against  the  vices  incident  to  indolence  and  inaction,  and  correct  the  evil 
of  subtracting  from  the  mass  of  the  labor  of  society,  where  labor  is  more 
valuable  than  in  any  other  country,  that  portion  of  it  which  enters  into 
the  composition  of  the  army.  But  I  most  solemnly  protest  against  any 
exercise  of  powers  of  this  kind  by  the  president  which  are  denied  to  Con- 
gress, And  if  the  opinions  expressed  by  him,  in  his  message,  were  com- 
municated, or  are  to  be  used  here  to  influence  the  judgment  of  the  House, 
their  authority  is  more  than  countervailed  by  the  authority  of  his  deliber- 
ate acts. 

Some  principles  drawn  from  political  economists  have  been  alluded  to, 
and  we  are  advised  to  leave  things  to  themselves,  upon  the  ground  that, 
when  the  condition  of  society  is  ripe  for  internal  improvements — that  is, 
when  capital  can  be  so  invested  with  a  fair  prospect  of  adequate  remuneration, 
they  will  be  executed  by  associations  of  individuals,  unaided  by  govern- 
ment. With  my  friend  from  South  Carolina  (Mr.  Lowndes)  I  concur  in 
this  as  a  general  maxim ;  and  I  also  concur  with  him  that  there  are 
exceptions  to  it.  The  foreign  policy  which  I  think  this  country  ought  to 
adopt,  presents  one  of  those  exceptions.  It  would,  perhaps,  be  better  for 
mankind  if,  in  the  intercourse  between  nations,  all  would  leave  skill  and 
industry  to  their  unstimulated  exertions.  But  this  is  not  done  ;  and  if 
other  powers  will  incite  the  industry  of  their  subjects,  and  depress  that  of 
our  citizens,  in  instances  where  they  may  come  into  competition,  we  must 
imitate  their  selfish  example.  Hence  the  necessity  to  protect  our  manu- 
factures. In  regard  to  internal  improvements,  it  does  not  follow  that  they 
will  always  be  constructed  whenever  they  will  afford  a  competent  dividend 
upon  the  capital  invested.  It  may  be  true,  generally,  that  in  old  countries 
where  there  is  a  great  accumulation  of  surplus  capital,  and  a  consequent 
low  rate  of  interest,  they  will  be  made.  But,  in  a  new  country,  the  con- 
dition of  society  may  be  ripe  for  public  works  long  before  there  is,  in  the 
hands  of  individuals,  the  necessary  accumulation  of  capital  to  effect  them ; 
and  besides,  there  is,  generally,  in  such  a  country,  not  only  a  scarcity  ot 
capital,  but  such  a  multiplicity  of  profitable  objects  presenting  themselves 
as  to  distract  the  judgment.  Further;  the  aggregate  benefit  resulting  to 
the  whole  society,  from  a  public  improvement,  may  be  such  as  to  amply 
justify  the  investment  of  capital  in  its  execution,  and  yet  that  benefit  may 
be  so  distributed  among  different  and  distant  persons  that  they  can  never 


134  SPEECHES   OF   HENEY   CLAY. 

be  got  to  act  in  concert.  The  turnpike  roads  wanted  to  pass  the  Alleghany 
mountains,  and  the  Delaware  and  Chesapeake  Canal  are  objects  of  this  de- 
scription. Those  who  will  be  most  benefited  by  these  improvements  reside 
at  a  considerable  distance  from  the  sites  of  them  ;  many  of  those  persons 
never  have  seen  and  never  will  see  them.  How  is  it  possible  to  regulate 
the  contributions,  or  to  present  to  individuals  so  situated  a  sufficiently 
lively  picture  of  their  real  interests,  to  get  them  to  make  exertions  in  ef- 
fectuating the  object  commensurate  with  their  respective  abilities?  I  think 
it  very  possible  that  the  capitalist  who  should  invest  his  money  in  one  of 
these  objects,  might  not  be  reimbursed  three  per  centum  annually  upon  it ; 
and  yet  society,  in  various  forms,  might  actually  reap  fifteen  or  twenty  per 
centum.  The  benefit  resulting  from  a  turnpike  road,  made  by  private  as- 
sociation, is  divided  between  the  capitalist  who  receives  his  tolls,  the  lands 
through  which  it  passes,  and  which  are  augmented  in  their  value,  and  the 
commodities  whose  value  is  enhanced  by  the  diminished  expense  of  trans- 
portation. A  combination,  upon  any  terms,  much  less  a  just  combination 
of  all  those  interests,  to  effect  the  improvement,  is  impracticable.  And  if 
you  await  the  arrival  of  the  period  when  the  tolls  alone  can  produce  a 
competent  dividend,  it  is  evident  that  you  will  have  to  suspend  its  execu- 
tion long  after  the  general  interests  of  society  would  have  authorized  it. 

Again,  improvements,  made  by  private  associations,  are  generally  made 
by  local  capital.  But  ages  must  elapse  before  there  will  be  concentrated 
in  certain  places,  where  the  interests  of  the  whole  community  may  call 
for  improvements,  sufficient  capital  to  make  them.  The  place  of  the  im- 
provement, too,  is  not  always  the  most  interested  in  its  accomplishment. 
Other  parts  of  the  Union — the  whole  line  of  the  seaboard — are  quite  as 
much,  if  not  more  interested,  in  the  Delaware  and  Chesapeake  Canal,  as 
the  small  tract  of  country  through  which  it  is  proposed  to  pass.  The 
same  observation  will  apply  to  turnpike  roads  passing  through  the  Alle- 
ghany mountain.  Sometimes  the  interest  of  the  place  of  the  improvement 
is  adverse  to  the  improvement  and  to  the  general  interest.  I  would  cite 
Louisville,  at  the  rapids  of  the  Ohio,  as  an  example,  whose  interest  will 
probably  be  more  promoted  by  the  continuance,  than  the  removal  of  the 
obstruction.  Of  all  the  modes  in  which  a  government  can  employ  its  sur- 
plus revenue,  none  is  more  permanently  beneficial  than  that  of  internal 
improvement.  Fixed  to  the  soil,  it  becomes  a  durable  part  of  the  land 
itself,  diffusing  comfort,  and  activity,  and  animation,  on  all  sides.  The 
first  direct  effect  is  on  the  agricultural  community,  into  whose  pockets 
comes  the  difference  in  the  expense  of  transportation  between  good  and 
bad  ways.  Thus,  if  the  price  of  transporting  a  barrel  of  flour  by  the 
erection  of  the  Cumberland  turnpike  should  be  lessened  two  dollars, 
the  producer  of  the  article  would  receive  that  two  dollars  more  now  than 
formerly. 

But,  putting  aside  all  pecuniary  considerations,  there  may  be  political 
motives  sufficiently  powerful  alone  to  justify  certain  internal  improvements. 


ON  INTERNAL  IMPROVEMENT.  135 

Does  not  our  country  present  such  ?  How  are  they  to  be  effected,  if 
things  are  left  to  themselves  ?  I  will  not  press  the  subject  further.  I  am 
but  too  sensible  how  much  I  have  abused  the  patience  of  the  committee 
by  trespassing  so  long  upon  its  attention.  The  magnitude  of  the  question, 
and  the  deep  interest  I  feel  in  its  rightful  decision,  must  be  my  apology. 
We  are  now  making  the  last  effort  to  establish  our  power,  and  I  call  on 
the  friends  of  Congress,  of  this  House,  or  the  true  friends  of  the  State 
rights  (not  charging  others  with  intending  to  oppose  them),  to  rally  round 
the  Constitution,  and  to  support  by  their  votes,  on  this  occasion,  the  legit- 
imate powers  of  the  Legislature.  If  we  do  nothing  this  session  but  pass 
an  abstract  resolution  on  the  subject,  I  shall,  under  all  circumstances,  con- 
sider it  a  triumph  for  the  best  interests  of  the  country,  of  which  posterity 
will,  if  we  do  not,  reap  the  benefit.  I  trust,  that  by  the  decision  which 
shall  be  given,  we  shall  assert,  uphold,  and  maintain,  the  authority  of 
Congress,  notwithstanding  all  that  has  been  or  may  be  said  against  it. 


EMANCIPATION   OF   THE    SOUTH   AMERICAN 

STATES. 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES,  MARCH  24,  1818. 

[Mr.  Clay  had  had  occasion,  in  1816  and  1817,  to  make  some 
incidental  allusions  to  the  great  subject  of  the  two  following 
speeches,  and  in  one  instance  to  come  out  boldly  upon  it.  The  war 
between  Spain  and  her  American  colonies,  had  now  been  carried 
on  for  several  years,  with  great,  even  barbarous  atrocities  on  the 
part  of  Spain,  and  with  constantly  augmenting  chances  in  favor 
of  the  ultimate  independence  of  the  colonies.  The  example  and 
successful  career  of  the  United  States  of  North  America,  had 
inspired  them  with  hope,  and  the  wrongs  of  Spain  were  much 
more  grievous  than  those  inflicted  by  Great  Britain  on  her 
colonies.  Spain  was  more  remote  from  her  rebellious  provinces, 
and  less  able  to  send  against  them  efficient  forces,  being  herself 
in  a  condition  of  rapid  decadence.  But  her  American  continent- 
al possessions  constituted  a  vast  domain,  and  the  richest  gem  in 
her  crown.  To  lose  them,  was  like  cutting  off  the  legs  and  arms 
of  a  man,  leaving  only  the  trunk.  Three  things,  in  such  a  case, 
invariably  follow  a  relentless  despotism,  sooner  or  later  :  first, 
that  despotism  knows  not  how  to  relax  its  severities  ;  next,  that 
it  drives  its  victims  to  desperation  ;  and  thirdly,  that,  if  there 
be  any  hope  of  freedom,  freedom  will  at  last  crown  the  efforts  of 
the  oppressed. 

It  was  morally  impossible  for  a  man  of  Mr.  Clay's  tempera- 
ment as  a  man,  and  his  position  as  an  American  statesman,  to 
look  on  this  struggle  with  feelings  of  indifference,  or  not  to  make 
an  effort,  in  some  form,  to  aid  these  oppressed  provinces  of  Spain. 
He  had  even  suggested,  on  a  former  occasion,  that  it  might  be 
expedient  for  the  United  States  to  form  an  alliance,  offensive 
and  defensive,  with  these  interesting  communities,  against  the 
mother  country.  On  the  present  occasion,  however,  he  only  pro- 
posed a  recognition  of  one  of  these  Spanish  colonies — The  United 
Provinces  of  Rio  de  la  Plata — as  a  government  de  facto,  and 
providing  for  a  minister — as  an  entering  wedge   for  a  similar 


EMANCIPATION    OF    THE    SOUTH    AMEKICAN    STATES.  137 

recognition  of  all  the  other  South  American  States,  when  circum- 
stances should  favor.     In  1817,  Mr.  Monroe,  president  of  the 
United  States,  had  sent  a  commission  of  inquiry  to  South  Amer- 
ica, Messrs.  Rodney,  Graham,  and  Bland,  to  report  on  the  con- 
dition and  political  prospects  of  those  Spanish  provinces,  and  at 
the  next  session  of  Congress,  asked  for  an  appropriation  to  defray 
its  expenses.     Mr.  Clay  moved  to  amend  the  bill  by  providing 
for  a  minister  to  the  La  Plata,  to  be  appointed  in  the  discretion 
of  the  president ;  and  opened  the  debate  by  the  following  speech 
The   entire   field  of  the  independence  of  the  South  American 
States  was,  of  course,  now  open,  and  Mr.  Clay  entered  it  with  a 
boldness   characteristic  only   of    himself — alone   in   the    moral 
power  of  his  sympathy  and  of  his  position.     He  consulted  naught 
but  his  own  heart  and  the  cause  of  freedom.     He  regarded  the 
American  continental  domains  of  Spain  as  occupying  precisely 
the  position  of  the  North  American  British  colonies,  when  they 
started  and  while  they  were  struggling  for  independence — ex- 
cepting only,  that  the  Spanish  colonies  had  stronger  claims  for 
freedom,  arising  from  their  greater  grievances.     The  political 
prospect  was  at  that  moment  the  most  inspiring  to  every  lover 
of  freedom,  which  the  world  ever  beheld.     It  was  nothing  less 
than  that  the  entire  American  continent  should  become  a  repub- 
lican empire,  in  contrast  with  the  European  continent  groaning 
under  a  variety  of  despotisms.     Nor  did  Mr.  Clay  propose  any 
thing  that  could  be  construed  into  a  casus  belli  by  Spain.     It 
was  only  to  send  a  minister  to  a  government  de  facto — a  right 
established  by  public  law.     Public  law,  therefore,  was  in  har- 
mony with  those  sympathies  which,  at  this  time  and  in  this 
case,  were  natural  to  all  American  freemen  ;  and  the  outburst 
of  argument  from  the  mouth  of  Mr.  Clay,  on  this  occasion,  came 
down  with  tremendous  effect,  not  only  upon  the  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives, but  upon  the  country  ;  and  not  only  on  this  coun- 
try,  but   on   the    Spanish   provinces  ;   and   not   only  in   these 
quarters,  but  it  burst  on  Spain  herself,  and  on  all  Europe,  as  a 
clap   of  thunder  from  the  skies.     It  was  republican  America, 
from  Cape  Horn  to  Hudson's  Bay,  against  monarchical  Europe, 
from  the  Mediterranean  to  Finland,  that  suddenly  started  up 
before  the  surprised  imaginations  of  men — all  from  this  debut  of 
Mr.  Clay  for  South  American  independence.     Mr.  Clay  had  now 
come  out  in  this  field,  armed  with  a  panoply  which  no  weapon 
could  pierce  ;  for  he  had  only  proposed  to  send  a  minister  to  a 
government  de  facto.'] 


138  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

I  rise,  Mr.  Chairman,  under  feelings  of  deeper  regret  than  I  have  ever 
experienced  on  any  former  occasion,  inspired,  principally,  by  the  painful 
consideration,  that  I  find  myself,  on  the  proposition  which  I  meant  to  sub- 
mit, differing  from  many  highly  esteemed  friends,  in  and  out  of  this  House, 
for  whose  judgment  I  entertained  the  greatest  respect.  A  knowledge  of 
this  circumstance  has  induced  me  to  pause;  to  subject  my  own  convictions 
to  the  severest  scrutiny,  and  to  revolve  the  question  over  and  over  again. 
But  all  my  reflections  have  conducted  me  to  the  same  clear  result ;  and, 
much  as  I  value  those  friends,  great  as  my  deference  is  for  their  opinions, 
I  can  not  hesitate,  when  reduced  to  the  distressing  alternative  of  conform- 
ing my  judgment  to  theirs,  or  persuing  the  deliberate  and  mature  dictates 
of  my  own  mind.  I  enjoy  some  consolation,  for  the  want  of  their  co- 
operation, from  the  persuasion  that,  if  I  err  on  this  occasion,  I  err  on  the 
side  of  the  liberty  and  happiness  of  a  large  portion  of  the  human  family. 
Another,  and,  if  possible,  indeed  a  greater,  source  of  the  regret  to  which 
I  refer,  is  the  utter  incompetency,  which  I  unfeignedly  feel,  to  do  any 
thing  like  adequate  justice  to  the  great  cause  of  American  independence 
and  freedom,  whose  interest  I  wish  to  promote  by  my  humble  exertions  in 
this  instance.  Exhausted  and  worn  down  as  I  am,  by  the  fatigue,  confine- 
ment, and  incessant  application  incident  to  the  arduous  duties  of  the 
honorable  station  I  hold,  during  a  four-months'  session,  I  shall  need 
all  that  kind  indulgence  which  has  been  so  often  extended  to  me  by  the 
House. 

I  beg,  in  the  first  place,  to  correct  misconceptions,  if  any  exist,  in  regard 
to  my  opinions.     I  am  averse  to  war  with  Spain,  or  with  any  power.     I 
would  give  no  just  cause  of  war  to  any  power — not  to  Spain   herself.     I 
have  seen  enough  of  war,  and  of  its  calamities,  even  when  successful.    No 
country  upon  earth  has  more  interest  than  this  in   cultivating  peace  and 
avoiding  war,  as  long  as  it  is  possible  honorably  to  avoid  it.     Gaining  ad- 
ditional strength  every  day  ;  our  numbers  doubling  in  periods  of  twenty- 
five  years  ;  with  an  income  outstripping  all  our  estimates,  and  so  great,  as, 
after  a  war  in  some  respects  disastrous,  to  furnish  results  which  carry 
astonishment,  if  not  dismay,  into  the  bosom  of  states  jealous  of  our  rising 
importance,  we  have  every  motives  for  the  love  of  peace.     I  can  not, 
however,  approve,  in  all  respects,  of  the  manner  in  which  our  negotiations 
with  Spain  have  been  conducted.     If  ever  a  favorable  time  existed  for  the 
demand,  on  the  part  of  an  injured  nation,  of  indemnity  for  past  wrongs 
from  the  aggressor,  such  is  the  present  time.    Impoverished  and  exhausted 
at  home,  by  the  wars  which  have  desolated  the  peninsula,  with  a  foreign 
war,  calling  for  infiuitely  more  resources,  in  men  and  money,  than  she  can 
possibly  command,  this  is  the  auspicious  period  for  insisting  upon  justice 
at  her  hands,  in  a  firm  and  decided  tone.     Time  is  precisely  what  Spain 
now  most  wants.     Yet  what  are  we  told  by  the  president,  in  his  message, 
at  the  commencement  of  Congress  ?     That  Spain  had  procrastinated,  aud 
we  acquiesced  in  her  procrastination.     And  the  Secretary  of  State,  in  a 


EMANCIPATION    OF    THE    SOUTH    AMEBIC  AN    STATES.  139 

lute  communication  with  Mr.  Onis,  after  ably  vindicating  all  our  rights, 
tells  the  Spanish  minister,  with  a  good  deal  of  sang  froid,  that  we  had 
patiently  waited  thirteen  years  for  a  redress  of  our  injuries,  and  that  it  re- 
quired no  great  effort  to  wait  longer  !  I  would  have  abstained  from  thus 
exposing  our  intentions.  Avoiding  the  use  of  the  language  of  menace, 
I  would  have  required,  in  temperate  and  decided  terms,  indemnity  for  all 
our  wrongs  ;  for  the  spoliations  of  our  commerce  ;  for  the  interruption  of 
the  right  of  depot  at  New  Orleans,  guarantied  by  treaty ;  for  the  insults 
repeatedly  offered  to  our  flag ;  for  the  Indian  hostilities,  which  she  was 
bound  to  prevent ;  for  belligerent  use  made  of  her  ports  and  territories,  by 
our  enemy,  during  the  late  war ;  and  the  instantaneous  liberation  of  tbe 
free  citizens  of  the  United  States,  now  imprisoned  in  her  jails.  Cotem- 
poraneous  with  that  .demand,  without  waiting  for  her  final  answer,  and 
with  a  view  to  the  favorable  operation  on  her  councils  in  regard  to  our 
own  peculiar  interests,  as  well  as  in  justice  to  the  cause  itself,  I  would 
recognize  any  established  government  in  Spanish  America.  I  would 
have  left  Spain  to  draw  her  own  inferences  from  these  proceedings,  as 
to  the  ultimate  step  which  this  country  might  adopt,  if  she  longer  with- 
held justice  from  us.  And  if  she  persevered  in  her  iniquity,  after  we  have 
conducted  the  negotiation  in  the  manner  I  have  endeavored  to  describe,  I 
would  then  take  up  and  decide  the  solemn  question  of  peace  or  war,  with 
the  advantage  of  all  the  light  shed  upon  it,  by  subsequent  events,  and  the 
probable  conduct  of  Europe. 

Spain  has  undoubtedly  given  us  abundant  and  just  cause  of  war.  But 
it  is  not  every  cause  of  war  that  should  lead  to  war.  War  is  one  of  those 
dreadful  scourges,  that  so  shakes  the  foundations  of  society,  overturns  or 
changes  the  character  of  governments,  interrupts  or  destroys  the  pursuits 
of  private  happiness,  brings,  in  short,  misery  and  wretchedness  in  so  many 
forms,  and  at  last  is,  in  its  issue,  so  doubtful  and  hazardous,  that  nothing 
but  dire  necessity  can  justify  an  appeal  to  arms.  If  we  are  to  have  war 
with  Spain,  I  have,  however,  no  hesitation  in  saying,  that  no  mode  of 
brino'inir  it  about  could  be  less  fortunate  than  that  of  seizing,  at  this  time, 
upon  her  adjoining  province.  There  was  a  time,  under  certain  circum- 
stances, when  we  might  have  occupied  East  Florida  with  safety  ;  had  we 
then  taken  it,  our  posture  in  the  negotiation  with  Spain  would  hnve  been 
totally  different  from  what  it  is.  But  we  have  permitted  that  time,  not 
with  my  consent,  to  pass  by  unimproved.  If  we  were  now  to  seize  upon 
Florida,  after  a  great  change  in  those  circumstances,  and  after  declaring 
our  intention  to  acquiesce  in  the  procrastination  desired  by  Spain,  in  what 
light  should  we  be  viewed  by  foreign  powers,  particularly  Great  Britain? 
We  have  already  been  accused  of  inordinate  ambition,  and  of  seeking  to 
aggrandize  ourselves  by  an  extension,  on  all  sides  of  our  limits.  Should 
we  not,  by  such  an  act  of  violence,  give  color  to  the  accusation  ?  No,  Mr. 
Chairman  ;  if  we  are  to  be  involved  in  a  war  with  Spain,  let  us  have  the 
credit  of  disinterestedness.      Let  us  put  her  yet  more  in  the  wrong.     Let 


140  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

us  command  the  respect  which  is  never  withheld  from  those  who  act  a 
noble  and  generous  part.  I  hope  to  communicate  to  the  committee  the 
conviction  which  I  so  strongly  feel,  that  the  adoption  of  the  amendment 
which  I  intend  to  propose,  would  not  hazard,  in  the  slightest  degree,  the 
peace  of  the  country.  But  if  that  peace  is  to  be  endangered,  I  would  in- 
finitely rather  it  should  be  for  our  exerting  the  right  appertaining  to  eveiy 
state,  of  acknowledging  the  independence  of  another  state,  than  for  the 
seizure  of  a  province,  which,  sooner  or  later,  we  must  certainly  acquire. 

In  contemplating  the  great  struggle  in  which  Spanish  America  is  now 
engaged,  our  attention  is  first  fixed  by  the  immensity  and  character  of  the 
country  which  Spain  seeks  again  to  subjugate.  Stretching  on  the  Pacific 
ocean  from  about  the  fortieth  degree  of  north  latitude  to  about  the  fifty- 
fifth  degree  of  south  latitude,  and  extending  from  the  mouth  of  the  Rio 
del  Norte  (exclusive  of  East  Florida),  around  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and 
along  the  South  Atlantic  to  near  Cape  Horn ;  it  is  about  five  thousand 
miles  in  length,  and  in  some  places  near  three  thousand  in  breadth. 
Within  this  vast  region  we  behold  the  most  sublime  and  interesting  objects 
of  creation  ;  the  loftiest  mountains,  the  most  majestic  rivers  in  the  world ; 
the  richest  mines  of  the  precious  metals,  and  the  choicest  productions  of 
the  eaith.  We  behold  there  a  spectacle  still  more  interesting  and  sublime 
— the  glorious  spectacle  of  eighteen  millions  of  people,  struggling  to  burst 
their  chains  and  to  be  free.  When  we  take  a  little  nearer  and  more  de- 
tailed view,  we  perceive  that  nature  lias,  as  it  were,  ordained  that  this  peo- 
ple and  this  country  shall  ultimately  constitute  several  different  nations. 
Leaving  the  United  States  on  the  north,  we  come  to  New  Spain,  or  the 
vice-royalty  of  Mexico  on  the  south  ;  passing  by  Guatemala,  we  reach  the 
vice-royalty  of  New  Granada,  the  late  captain-generalship  of  Venezuela, 
and  Guiana,  lying  on  the  east  side  of  the  Andes.  Stepping  over  the 
Brazils,  we  ariive  at  the  united  provinces  of  La  Plata,  and  crossing  the 
Andes,  we  find  Chili  on  their  west  side,  and,  further  north,  the  vice-royalty 
of  Lima,  or  Peru.  Each  of  these  several  parts  is  sufficent  in  itself,  in  point 
of  limits  to  constitute  a  powerful  State  ;  and,  in  point  of  population,  that 
which  has  the  smallest,  contains  enough  to  make  it  respectable.  Through- 
out all  the  extent  of  that  great  portion  of  the  world,  which  I  have 
attempted  thus  hastily  to  describe,  the  spiiit  of  revolt  against  the  dominion 
of  Spain  has  manifested  itself.  The  Revolution  has  been  attended  with 
various  degrees  of  success  in  the  several  parts  of  Spanish  America.  In 
some  it  has  been  already  crowned,  as  I  shall  endeavor  to  show,  with  com- 
plete success,  and  in  all  I  am  persuaded  that  independence  has  struck  such 
deep  root,  that  the  power  of  Spain  can  never  eradicate  it.  What  are  the 
causes  of  this  great  movement  ? 

Three  hundred  years  ago,  upon  the  ruins  of- the  thrones  of  Montezuma 
and  the  Incas  of  Peru,  Spain  erected  the  most  stupendous  system  of 
colonial  despotism  that  the  world  has  ever  seen — the  most  vigorous,  the 
most  exclusive.     The  great  principle  and  object  of  this  system,  has  been, 


EMANCIPATION   OF    THE    SOUTH    AMERICAN    STATES.  141 

to  render  one  of  the  largest  portions  of  the  world  exclusively  subservient, 
in  all  its  faculties,  to  the  interest  of  an  inconsiderable  spot  in  Europe.     To 
effectuate  this  aim  of  her  policy,  she  locked  up  Spanish  America  from  all 
the  rest  of  the  world,  and  prohibited,  under  the  severest  penalties,  any 
foreigner  from  entering  any  part  of  it.     To  keep  the  natives  themselves 
ignorant  of  each  other,  and  of  the  strength   and  resources  of  the  several 
parts  of  her  American  possessions,  she  next  prohibited  the  inhabitants  of 
one  vice-royalty  or  government  from  visiting  those  of  another ;  so  that  the 
inhabitants  of  Mexico,  for  example,  were  not  allowed  to  enter  the  vice- 
royalty  of  New  Granada.     The  agriculture  of   those  vast  regions  was  so 
regulated  and  restrained,  as  to  prevent  all  collision  with  the  agriculture  of 
the  peninsula.     Where  nature,  by  the  character  and  composition  of  the 
soil,  had  commanded,  the  abominable  system  of  Spain  has  forbidden,  the 
growth  of  certain  articles.     Thus  the  olive  and  the  vine,  to  which  Spanish 
America  is  so  well  adapted,  are  prohibited,  wherever  their  culture  can  in- 
terfere with  the  olive  and  the  vine  of  the  peninsula.     The  commerce  of  the 
country,  in  the  direction  and  objects  of  the  exports   and  imports,  is  also 
subjected  to  the  narrow  and  selfish  views   of  Spain,  and  fettered  by  the 
odious  spirit  of  monopoly,  existing  in  Cadiz.     She  has  sought,  by  scatter- 
ing discord  among  the  several  castes  of  her  American  population,  and  by 
a  debasing  course  of  education,  to  perpetuate  her  oppression.     Whatever 
concerns  public  law,  or  the  science  of  government,  all  writings  upon  polit- 
ical economy,  or  that  tend   to  give  vigor,  and  freedom,  and  expansion,  to 
the  intellect,  are  prohibited.     Gentlemen  would  be  astonished  by  the  long 
list  of  distinguished  authors,  whom  she  proscribes,  to  be  found  in  Depon's 
and  other  works.     A   main  feature  in  her  policy,  is  that  which  constantly 
elevates  the   European  and  depresses  the  American  character.     Out  of 
upward  of  seven  hundred  and  fifty  viceroys  and  captains-general,  whom 
she  has  appointed  since  the  conquest  of  America,  about  eighteen  only  have 
been  from  the  body  of  the  American  population.     On  all  occasions,  she 
seeks  to  raise  and  promote  her  European  subjects,  and  to  degrade  and 
humiliate  the  Creoles.      Wnerever  in  America  her  sway  extends,  every 
thing  seems  to  pine  and  wither  beneath  its  baneful  influence.     The  richest 
regions  of  the  earth,  man,  his  happiness  and  his  education,  all  the  fine 
faculties  of  his  soul,  are  regulated,  and  modified,  and  molded,  to  suit  the 
execrable  purposes  of  an  inexorable  despotism. 

Such  is  a  brief  and  imperfect  picture  of  the  state  of  things  in  Spanish 
America,  in  1808,  when  the  famous  transactions  of  Bayonne  occurred. 
The  king  of  Spain  and  the  Indies  (for  Spanish  America  has  always  constitu- 
ted an  integral  part  of  the  Spanish  empire)  abdicated  his  throne  and  became  a 
voluntary  captive.  Even  at  this  day,  one  does  not  know  whether  he  should 
condemn  the  baseness  and  perfidy  of  the  one  party,  or  despise  the  meanness 
and  imbecility  of  the  other.  If  the  obligation  of  obedience  and  allegiance 
existed  on  the  part  of  the  colonies  to  the  king  of  Spain,  it  was  founded  on 
the  duty  of  protection  which  he  owed  them.     By  disqualifying  himself  for 


142  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

the  performance  of  this  duty,  they  became  released  from  that  obligation. 
The  monarchy  was  dissolved ;  and  each  integral  part  had  a  right  to  seek  its 
own  happiness,  by  the  institution  of  any  new  government  adapted  to  its 
wants.  Joseph  Bonaparte,  the  successor  cle  facto  of  Ferdinand,  recognized 
this  right  on  the  part  of  the  colonies,  and  recommended  them  to  establish 
their  independence.  Thus,  upon  the  ground  of  strict  right;  upon  the  foot- 
ing of  a  mere  legal  question,  governed  by  forensic  rules,  the  colonies,  being 
absolved  by  the  acts  of  the  parent  country  from  the  duty  of  subjection  to 
it,  had  an  indisputable  right  to  set  up  for  themselves.  But  I  take  a  broad- 
er and  a  bolder  position.  I  maintain,  that  an  oppressed  people  are  author- 
ized, whenever  they  can,  to  rise  and  to  break  their  fetters.  This  was  the 
great  principle  of  the  English  Revolution.  It  was  the  great  principle  of  our 
own.  Vattel,  if  authority  were  wanting,  expressly  supports  this  right.  We 
must  pass  sentence  of  condemnation  upon  the  founders  of  our  liberty,  say 
that  they  were  rebels,  traitors,  and  that  we  are  at  this  moment  legislating 
without  competent  powers,  before  we  can  condemn  the  cause  of  Spanish 
America.  Our  Revolution  was  mainly  directed  against  the  mere  theory  of 
tyranny.  We  had  suffered  comparatively  but  little ;  we  had,  in  some  re- 
spects, been  kindly  treated ;  but  our  intrepid  and  intelligent  fathers  saw,  in 
the  usurpation  of  the  power  to  levy  an  inconsiderable  tax,  the  long  train 
of  oppressive  acts  that  were  to  follow.  They  rose,  they  breasted  the  storm ; 
they  achieved  our  freedom.  Spanish  America  for  centuries  has  been  doomed 
to  the  practical  effects  of  an  odious  tyranny.  If  we  were  justified,  she  is  more 
than  justified. 

I  am  no  propagandist.  I  would  not  seek  to  force  upon  other  nations  our 
principles  and  our  liberty,  if  they  did  not  want  them.  I  would  not  disturb 
the  repose  even  of  a  detestable  despotism.  But,  if  an  abused  and  oppressed 
people  will  their  freedom ;  if  they  seek  to  establish  it ;  if,  in  truth,  they, 
have  established  it ;  we  have  a  right,  as  a  sovereign  power,  to  notice  the 
fact,  and  to  act  as  circumstances  and  our  interest  require.  I  will  say,  in  the 
language  of  the  venerated  father  of  my  country,  "born  in  a  land  of  liberty, 
my  anxious  recollections,  my  sympathetic  feelings,  and  my  best  wishes,  are 
irresistibly  excited,  whensoever,  in  any  country,  I  see  an  oppressed  nation 
unfurl  the  banners  of  freedom."  Whenever  I  think  of  Spanish  America 
the  image  irresstibly  forces  itself  upon  my  mind,  of  an  elder  brother,  whose 
education  has  been  neglected,  whose  person  has  been  abused  and  maltreat- 
ed, and  who  has  been  disinherited  by  the  unkindness  of  an  unnatural  pa- 
rent. And,  when  I  contemplate  the  glorious  struggle  which  that  country 
is  now  making,  I  think  I  behold  that  brother  rising,  by  the  power  and  en- 
ergy of  his  fine  native  genius,  to  the  manly  rank  which  nature,  and  nature's 
God,  intended  for  him. 

If  Spanish  America  be  entitled  to  success  from  the  justness  of  her  cause, 
we  have  no  less  reason  to  wish  that  success,  from  the  horrible  character 
which  the  royal  arms  have  given  to  the  war.  More  atrocities,  than  those 
which  have  been  perpetrated  during  its  existence,  are  not  to  be  found,  even 


EMANCIPATION   OF   THE   SOUTH   AMERICAN   STATES.  143 

in  the  annals  of  Spain  herself.  And  history,  reserving  some  of  her  black- 
est pages  for  the  name  of  Morillo,  is  prepared  to  place  him  by  the  side  of 
his  great  prototype,  the  infamous  desolater  of  the  Netherlands.  He  who 
has  looked  into  the  history  of  the  conduct  of  this  war,  is  constantly 
shocked  at  the' revolting  scenes  which  it  portrays;  at  the  refusal,  on  the 
part  of  the  commanders  of  the  royal  forces,  to  treat,  on  any  terms,  with 
the  other  side  ;  at  the  denial  of  quarter ;  at  the  butchery,  in  cold  blood, 
of  prisoners ;  at  the  violation  of  flags,  in  some  cases,  after  being  received, 
with  religious  ceremonies ;  at  the  instigation  of  slaves  to  rise  against  their 
owners  ;  and  at  acts  of  wanton  and  useless  barbarity.  Neither  the  weak- 
ness of  the  other  sex,  nor  the  imbecility  of  old  age,  nor  the  innocence  of 
infants,  nor  the  reverence  due  to  the  sacerdotal  character,  can  stay  the  arm 
of  royal  vengeance.  On  this  subject,  I  beg  leave  to  trouble  the  committee, 
with  reading  a  few  passages  from  a  most  authentic  document,  the  manifesto 
of  the  Congress  of  the  United  Provinces  of  Rio  del  la  Plata,  published  in 
October  last.  This  is  a  paper  of  the  highest  authority  ;  it  is  an  appeal  to 
the  world ;  it  asserts  facts  of  notoriety  in  the  face  of  the  whole  world.  It 
is  not  to  be  credited,  that  the  Congress  would  come  forward  with  a  state- 
ment which  was  not  true,  when  the  means,  if  it  were  false,  of  exposing 
their  fabrications,  must  be  so  abundant,  and  so  easy  to  command.  It  is  a 
document,  in  short,  that  stands  upon  the  same  footing  of  authority  with 
our  own  papers,  promulgated  during  the  Revolution  by  our  Congress.  I 
will  add,  that  many  of  the  facts  which  it  affirms,  are  corroborated  by  most 
respectable  historical  testimony,  which  is  in  my  own  possession  : 

"  Memory  shudders  at  the  recital  of  the  horrors  that  were  committed  by  Gk>y- 
eneche  in  Cochabamba.  Would  to  heaven  it  were  possible  to  blot  from  remem- 
brance the  name  of  that  ungrateful  and  blood-thirsty  American ;  who,  on  the 
day  of  his  entry,  ordered  the  virtuous  governor  and  intendant,  Antesana,  to  be 
shot ;  who,  beholding  from  the  balcony  of  his  house  that  infamous  murder,  cried  out 
with  a  ferocious  voice  to  the  soldiers,  that  they  must  not  fire  at  the  head,  be- 
cause he  wanted  it  to  be  affixed  to  a  pole  ;  and  who,  after  the  head  wras  taken 
off,  ordered  the  cold  corpse  to  be  dragged  through  the  streets ;  and,  by  a  bar- 
barous decree,  placed  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  the  citizens  at  the  mercy  of  his 
unbridled  soldiery,  leaving  them  to  exercise  their  licentious  and  brutal  sway  du- 
ring several  days.  But  those  blind  and  cruelly  capricious  men  (the  Spaniards) 
rejected  the  mediation  of  England,  and  dispatched  rigorous  orders  to  all  the  gen- 
erals, to  aggravate  the  War,  and  to  punish  us  with  more  severity.  The  scaffolds 
were  everywhere  multiplied,  and  invention  was  racked  to  devise  means  for 
spreading  murder,  distress,  and  consternation. 

"  Thenceforth  they  made  all  possible  efforts  to  spread  division  among  us,  to 
incite  us  to  mutual  extermination ;  they  have  slandered  us  with  the  most  atro- 
cious calumnies ;  accusing  us  of  plotting  the  destruction  of  our  holy  religion, 
the  abolition  of  all  morality,  and  of  introducing  licentiousness  of  manners.  They 
wage  a  religious  war  against  us,  contriving  a  thousand  artifices  to  disturb  and 
alarm  the  consciences  of  the  people,  making  the  Spanish  bishops  issue  decrees 
of  ecclesiastical  condemnation,  public    excommunications,  and  disseminating, 


144  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

through  the  medium  of  some  ignorant  confessor,  fanatical  doctrines  in  the  tribu- 
nal of  penitence.  By  means  of  these  religious  discords,  they  have  divided  fam- 
ilies against  themselves ;  they  have  caused  disaffection  between  parents  and 
children ;  they  have  dissolved  the  tender  ties  which  unite  man  and  wife  ;  they 
have  spread  rancor  and  implacable  hatred  between  brothers  most  endeared,  and 
they  have  presumed  to  throw  all  nature  into  discord. 

"  They  have  adopted  the  system  of  murdering  men  indiscriminately,  to  di- 
minish our  numbers ;  and,  on  their  entry  into  towns,  they  have  swept  off  all, 
even  the  market  people,  leading  them  to  the  open  squares,  and  there  shooting 
them  one  by  one.  The  cities  of  Chuquisaca  and  Cochabamba  have  more  than 
once  been  the  theaters  of  these  horrid  slaughters. 

"  They  have  intermixed  with  then-  troops,  soldiers  of  ours,  whom  they  had 
taken  prisoners,  carrying  away  the  officers  in  chains,  to  garrisons  where  it  is  im- 
possible to  preserve  health  for  a  year ;  they  have  left  others  to  die  in  their  pris- 
ons, of  hunger  and  misery,  and  others  they  have  forced  to  hard  labor  on  the 
public  works.  They  have  exultingly  put  to  death  our  bearers  of  flags  of  truce, 
and  have  been  guilty  of  the  blackest  atrocities  to  our  chiefs,  after  they  had  sur- 
rendered, as  well  as  to  other  principal  characters,  in  disregard  of  the  humanity 
With  which  we  treated  prisoners ;  as  a  proof  of  it,  witness  the  deputy  Mutes 
of  Potosi,  the  Captain-General  Pumacagua,  General  Augulo,  and  his  brother 
Commandant  Munecas,  and  other  partisan  chiefs,  who  were  shot  in  cold  blood 
after  having  been  prisoners  for  several  days. 

"  They  took  a  brutal  pleasure  in  cropping  the  ears  of  the  natives  of  the  town 
of  Ville-Grande,  and  sending  a  basket  full  of  them  as  presents  to  the  head- 
quarters. They  afterward  burnt  that  town,  and  set  fire  to  thirty  other  towns 
of  Peru,  and,  worse  than  the  worst  of  savages,  shutting  the  inhabitants  up  in 
the  houses  before  setting  them  on  fire,  that  they  might  be  burnt  alive. 

"  They  have  not  only  been  cruel  and  unsparing  in  their  mode  of  murder,  but 
they  have  been  void  of  all  morality  and  pub  he  decency,  causing  aged  ecclesias- 
tics and  women  to  be  lashed  to  a  gun,  and  publicly  flogged,  with  the  abomina- 
tion of  first  having  them  stripped,  and  their  nakedness  exposed  to  shame  in  the 
presence  of  their  troops. 

"  They  established  an  inquisitorial  system  in  all  these  punishments ;  they 
have  seized  on  peaceable  inhabitants,  and  transported  them  across  the  sea,  to  be 
judged  for  suspected  crimes,  and  they  have  put  a  great  number  of  citizens  to 
death  everywhere,  without  accusation  or  the  form  of  a  trial. 

"  They  have  invented  a  crime  of  unexampled  horror,  in  poisoning  our  water 
and  provisions,  when  they  were  conquered  by  General  Pineto  at  Lapaz ;  and  in 
return  for  the  kindness  with  which  we  treated  them,  after  they  had  surrendered 
at  discretion,  they  had  the  barbarity  to  blow  up  the  head-quarters,  under  which 
they  had  constructed  a  mine,  and  prepared  a  train  beforehand. 

"  He  has  branded  us  with  the  stigma  of  rebels,  the  moment  he  returned  to 
Madrid  ;  he  refused  to  listen  to  our  complaints,  or  to  receive  our  supplications ; 
and,  as  an  act  of  extreme  favor,  he  offered  us  pardon.  He  confirmed  the  vice- 
roys, governors,  and  generals  whom  he  had  found  actually  glutted  with  carnage- 
He  declared  us  guilty  of  a  high  misdemeanor,  for  having  dared  to  frame  a  con- 
stitution for  our  own  government,  free  from  the  control  of  a  deified,  absolute, 
and  tyrannical  power,  under  which  we  had  groaned  three  centuries ;  a  measure 
that  could  be  offensive  only  to  a  prince,  an  enemy  to  justice  and  beneficence, 
and  consequently  unworthy  to  rule  over  us. 


EMANCIPATION   OF    THE   SOUTH   AMERICAN    STATES.  145 

"He  then  undertook,  with  the  aid  of  his  ministers,  to  equip  large  military  ar- 
maments, to  be  directed  against  us.  He  caused  numerous  armies  to  be  sent  out 
to  consummate  the  work  of  devastation,  fire,  and  plunder. 

"  He  has  sent  his  generals,  with  certain  decrees  of  pardon,  which  they  publish 
to  deceive  the  ignorant,  and  induce  them  to  facilitate  their  entrance  into  towns, 
while  at  the  same  time  he  has  given  them  other  secret  instructions,  authorizing 
them,  as  soon  as  they  could  get  possession  of  a  place,  to  hang,  burn,  confis- 
cate, and  sack ;  to  encourage  private  assassinations,  and  to  commit  every  speies 
of  injury  in  their  power,  against  the  deluded  beings  who  had  confided  in  his  pre- 
tended pardon.  It  is  in  the  name  of  Ferdinand  of  Bourbon,  that  the  heads  of 
patriot  officers,  prisoners,  are  fixed  up  in  the  highways,  that  they  beat  and  stoned 
to  death  a  commandant  of  light  troops,  and  that,  after  having  killed  Colonel 
Camugo,  in  the  same  manner,  by  the  hands  of  the  indecent  Centeno,  they  cut 
off  his  head,  and  sent  it  as  a  present  to  General  Pazuela,  telling  him  it  was  a 
miracle  of  the  virgin  of  the  Carmelites." 

In  the  establishment  of  the  independence  of  Spanish  America,  the 
'  United  States  have  the  deepest  interest.     I  have  no  hesitation  in  asserting 
my  firm  belief,  that  there  is  no  question  in  the  foreign  policy  of  this  coun- 
try which  has  ever  arisen,  or  which  I  can  conceive  as  ever  occurring,  in 
the  decision  of  which  we  have  had  or  can  have  so  much  at  stake.     This 
interest  concerns  our  politics,  our  commerce,  our  navigation.     There  can 
not  be  a  doubt  that  Spanish  America,  once  independent,  whatever  may  be 
the  form  of  the  governments  established  in  its  several  parts,  these  govern- 
ments will  be  animated  by  an  American  feeling!  and  guided  by  an  Amer- 
ican policy.     They  will  obey  the  laws  of  the  system  of  the  New  World, 
of  which  they  will  compose  a  part,  in  contradistinction  to  that  of  Europe.  ^ 
Without  the  influence  of  that  vortex  in  Europe,  the  balance  of  power  be- 
tween its  several  parts,  the  preservation  of  which  has  so  often  drenched 
Europe  in  blood,  America  is  sufficiently  remote  to  contemplate  the  new  wars 
which  are  to  afflict  that  quarter  of  the  globe,  as  a  calm,  if  not  a  cold  and 
indifferent  spectator.     In  relation  to  those  wars  the  several  parts  of  Amer- 
ica will  generally  stand  neutral.     And  as,  during  the  period  when  they 
rage,  it  will  be  important  that  a  liberal  system  of  neutrality  should  be 
adopted  and  observed,  all  America  will  be  interested  in  maintaining  and 
enforcing  such  a  system.     The  independence  of  Spanish  America,  then,  is 
an  interest  of  primary  consideration.     Next  to  that,  and  highly  important 
in  itself,  is  the  consideration  of  the  nature  of  their  governments.     That  is 
a  question,  however,  for  themselves.     They  will,  no  doubt,  adopt  those 
kinds  of  government  which  are  best  suited  to  their  condition,  best  cal- 
culated for  their  happiness.     Anxious  as  I  am  that  they  should  be  freei^ 
governments,  we   have  no  right  to  prescribe  for  them.     They  are,  and 
ought  to  be,  the  sole  judges  for  themselves.     I  am  strongly  inclined  to  be- 
lieve that  they  will  in  most,  if  not  all  parts  of  their  country,  establish  free 
governments.     We  are  their  great  example.     Of  us  they  constantly  speak 
as  of  brothers,  having  a  similar  origin.     They  adopt  our  principles,  copy 

10 


146  SPEECHES  OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

our  institutions,  and,  in  many  instances,  employ  the  very  language  and 
sentiments  of  our  revolutionary  papers. 

But  it  is  sometimes  said  that  they  are  too  ignorant  and  too  superstitious 
to  admit  of  the  existence  of  free  government.  This  charge  of  ignorance 
is  often  urged  by  persons  themselves  actually  ignorant  of  the  real  con- 
dition of  that  people.  I  deny  the  alleged  fact  of  ignorance ;  I  deny  the 
inference  from  that  fact,  if  it  were  true,  that  they  want  capacity  for  free 
government ;  and  I  refuse  assent  to  the  further  conclusion,  if  the  fact  were 
true,  and  the  inference  just,  that  we  are  to  be  indifferent  to  their  fate.  All 
the  writers  of  the  most  established  authority,  Depons,  Humboldt,  and 
others,  concur  in  assigning  to  the  peoj)le  of  Spanish  America  great  quick- 
ness, genius,  and  particular  aptitude  for  the  acquisition  of  the  exact 
sciences,  and  others  which  they  have  been  allowed  to  cultivate.  In  astron- 
omy, geology,  mineralogy,  chemistry,  botany,  and  so  forth,  they  are  al- 
lowed to  make  distinguished  proficiency.  They  justly  boast  of  their 
Abzate,  Velasques,  and  Gama,  and  other  illustrious  contributors  to  science. 
They  have  nine  universities,  and  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  it  is  affirmed  by 
Humboldt,  that  there  are  more  solid  scientific  establishments  than  in  any 
city  even  in  North  America.  I  would  refer  to  the  message  of  the  supreme 
director  of  La  Plata,  which  I  shall  hereafter  have  occasion  to  use  for 
another  purpose,  as  a  model  of  fine  composition  of  a  State  paper,  chal- 
lenging a  comparison  with  any,  the  most  celebrated,  that  ever  issued  from 
the  pens  of  Jefferson  or  Madison.  Gentlemen  will  egregiously  err  if  they 
form  their  opinions  of  the  present  moral  condition  of  Spanish  America, 
from  what  it  was  under  the  debasing  system  of  Spain.  The  eight  years' 
revolution  in  which  it  has  been  engaged  has  already  produced  a  powerful 
effect.     Education  has  been  attended  to,  and  genius  developed. 

"  As  soon  as  the  project  of  the  revolution  arose  on  the  shores  of  La  Plata, 
genius  and  talent  exhibited  their  influence  ;  the  capacity  of  the  people  became 
manifest,  and  the  means  of  acquiring  knowledge  were  soon  made  the  favorite 
pursuit  of  the  youth.  As  far  as  the  wants  or  the  inevitable  interruption  of  af- 
fairs have  allowed,  every  tiling  has  been  done  to  disseminate  useful  information. 
The  liberty  of  the  press  has  indeed  met  with  some  occasional  checks ;  but  in 
Buenos  Ayres  alone,  as  many  periodical  works  weekly  issue  from  the  press  as 
in  Spain  and  Portugal  put  together." 

The  fact  is  not  therefore  true,  that  the  imputed  ignorance  exists;  but, 
if  it  do,  I  repeat,  I  dispute  the  inference.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  thrones, 
that  man  is  too  ignorant  to  govern  himself.  Their  partizans  assert  his  in- 
capacity, in  reference  to  all  nations ;  if  they  can  not  command  universal 
assent  to  the  proposition,  it  is  then  demanded  as  to  particular  nations ;  and 
our  pride  and  our  presumption  too  often  make  converts  of  us.  I  contend 
that  it  is  to  arraign  the  dispositions  of  Providence  himself,  to  suppose  that 
he  has  created  beings  incapable  of  governing  themselves,  and  to  be 
trampled  on  by  kings.     Self-government  is  the  natural  government  of 


EMANCIPATION   OF   THE   SOUTH   AMEEIOAN    STATES.  147 

man,  and  for  proof  I  refer  to  the  aborigines  of  our  own  land.  "Were  I  to 
speculate  in  hypotheses  unfavorable  to  human  liberty,  my  speculations 
should  be  founded  rather  upon  the  vices,  refinements,  or  density  of  popula- 
tion. Crowded  together  in  compact  masses,  even  if  they  were  philoso- 
phers, the  contagion  of  the  passions  is  communicated  and  caught,  and  the 
effect,  too  often,  I  admit,  is  the  overthrow  of  liberty.  Dispersed  over  such 
an  immense  space  as  that  on  which  the  people  of  Spanish  America  are 
spread,  their  physical,  and  I  believe  also  their  moral  condition,  both  favor 
their  liberty. 

With  regard  to  their  superstition,  they  worship  the  same  God  with  us. 
Their  prayers  are  offered  up  in  their  temples  to  the  same  Redeemer,  whose 
intercession  we  expect  to  save  us.  Nor  is  there  any  thing  in  the  Catholic 
religion  unfavorable  to  freedom.  All  religions  united  with  government, 
are  more  or  less  inimical  to  liberty.  All,  separated  from  government,  are 
compatible  with  liberty.  If  the  people  of  Spanish  America  have  not  already 
gone  as  far  in  religious  toleration  as  we  have,  the  difference  in  their  condi- 
tion from  ours  should  not  be  forgotten.  Every  thing  is  progressive  ;  and,  in 
time,  I  hope  to  see  them  imitating,  in  this  respect,  our  example.*  But  grant 
that  the  people  of  Spanish  America  are  ignorant,  and  incompetent  for  free ' 
government,  to  whom  is  that  ignorance  to  be  ascribed  ?  Is  it  not  to  the 
execrable  system  of  Spain,  which  she  seeks  again  to  establish  and  to  per- 
petuate ?  So  far  from  chilling  our  hearts,  it  ought  to  increase  our  solici- 
tude for  our  unfortunate  brethren.  It  ought  to  animate  us  to  desire  the 
redemption  of  the  minds  and  bodies  of  unborn  millions,  from  the  brutifying 
effects  of  a  system  whose  tendency  is  to  stifle  the  faculties  of  the  soul,  and 
to  degrade  them  to  the  level  of  beasts.  I  would  invoke  the  spirits  of  our 
departed  fathers.  Was  it  for  yourselves  only  that  you  nobly  fought  ?  No, 
no  !  It  was  the  chains  that  were  forging  for  your  posterity,  that  made 
you  fly  to  arms,  and,  scattering  the  elements  of  these  chains  to  the  winds, 
you  transmitted  to  us  the  rich  inheritance  of  liberty. 

The  exports  of  Spanish  America  (exclusive  of  those  of  the  islands)  are 
estimated  in  the  valuable  little  work  of  M.  Torres,  deserving  to  be  better 
known,  at  about  eighty-one  millions  of  dollars.  Of  these,  more  than  three 
fourths  are  precious  metals.  The  residue  are  cocoa,  coffee,  cochineal, 
sugar,  and  some  other  articles.  No  nation  ever  offered  richer  commodities 
in  exchange.  It  is  of  no  material  consequence,  that  we  produce  but  little 
that  Spanish  America  wants.  Commerce,  as  it  actually  exists  in  the  hands 
of  maritime  states,  is  no  longer  confined  to  a  mere  barter,  between  any 
two  States,  of  their  respective  productions.  It  renders  tributary  to  its  in- 
terests the  commodities  of  all  quarters  of  the  world  ;  so  that  a  rich  Amer- 
ican cargo,  or  the  contents  of  an  American  commercial  warehouse,  present 
you  with  whatever  is  rare  or  valuable,  in  every  part  of  the  globe.  Com- 
merce is  not  to  be  judged  by  its  results  in  transactions  with  one  nation 
only.  Unfavorable  balances  existing  with  one  State,  are  made  up  by 
contrary  balances  with  other  States,  and  its  true  value  should  be  tested  by 


148  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

the  totality  of  its  operations.  Our  greatest  trade,  that  with  Great  Britain, 
judged  by  the  amount  of  what  we  sell  for  her  consumption,  and  what  we 
buy  of  her  for  ours,  would  be  pronounced  ruinous.  But  the  unfavorable 
balance  is  covered  by  the  profits  of  trade  with  other  nations.  We  may  safely 
trust  to  the  daring  enterprise  of  our  merchants.  The  precious  metals  are 
in  South  America,  and  they  will  command  the  articles  waited  in  South 
America,  which  will  purchase  them.  Our  navigation  will  be  benefited  by 
the  transportation,  and  our  country  will  realize  the  mercantile  profits.  Al- 
ready the  item  in  our.  exports  of  American  manufactures  is  respectable. 
They  go  chiefly  to  the  West  Indies  and  to  Spanish  America.  This  item 
is  constantly  augmenting.  And  I  would  again,  as  I  have  on  another  oc- 
casion, ask  gentlemen  to  elevate  themselves  to  the  actual  importance  and 
greatness  of  our  republic ;  to  reflect,  like  true  American  statesmen,  that 
we  are  not  legislating  for  the  present  day  only ;  and  to  contemplate  this 
country  in  its  march  to  true  greatness,  when  millions  and  millions  will  be 
added  to  our  population,  and  when  the  increased  productive  industry  will 
furnish  an  infinite  variety  of  fabrics  for  foreign  consumption,  in  order  to 
supply  our  wants.  The  distribution  of  the  precious  metals  has  hitherto 
been  principally  made  through  the  circuitous  channel  of  Cadiz.  No  one 
can  foresee  all  the  effects  which  will  result  from  a  direct  distribution  of 
them  from  the  mines  which  produce  them.  One  of  these  effects  will  prob- 
ably be,  to  give  us  the  entire  command  of  the  Indian  trade.  The  advan- 
tage we  have  on  the  map  of  the  world  over  Europe,  in  that  respect,  is 
prodigious.  Again,  if  England,  persisting  in  her  colonial  monopoly,  con- 
tinues to  occlude  her  ports  in  the  West  Indies  to  us,  and  we  should,  as  I 
contend  we  ought,  meet  her  system  by  a  countervailing  measure,  Venezu- 
ela, New  Granada,  and  other  parts  of  Spanish  America,  would  afford  us 
all  we  get  from  the  British  West  Indies.  I  confess  that  I  despair,  for  the 
present,  of  adopting  that  salutary  measure.  It  was  proposed  at  the  last 
session,  and  postponed.  During  the  present  session,  it  has  been  again  pro- 
posed, and,  I  fear,  will  be  again  postponed.  I  see,  and  I  own  it  with 
infinite  regret,  a  tone  and  a  feeling  in  the  councils  of  the  country,  infinitely 
below  that  which  belongs  to  the  country.  It  is,  perhaps,  the  moral 
consequence  of  the  exertions  of  the  late  war.  We  are  alarmed  at  dan- 
gers, we  know  not  what ;  by  specters  conjured  up  by  our  own  vivid  im- 
aginations. 

The  West  India  bill  is  brought  up.  We  shrug  our  shoulders,  talk  of 
restrictions,  non-intercourse,  embargo,  commercial  warfare,  make  long  faces, 
and — postpone  the  bill.  The  time  will  however  come,  must  come,  when 
this  country  will  not  submit  to  a  commerce  with  the  British  colonies,  upon 
the  terms  which  England  alone  prescribes.  And,  I  repeat,  when  it  arrives, 
Spanish  America  will  afford  us  an  ample  substitute.  Then,  as  to  our  navi- 
gation :  gentlemen  should  recollect,  that  if  reasoning  from  past  experience 
were  safe  for  the  future,  our  great  commercial  rival  will  be  in  war  a  greater 
number  of  years  than  she  will  be  in  peace.     Whenever  she  shall  be  at 


EMANCIPATION   OF   THE   SOUTH   AMERICAN   STATES.  149 

war,  and  we  are  in  peace,  our  navigation  being  free  from  the  risks  and  in- 
surance incident  to  war,  we  shall  engross  almost  the  whole  transportation 
of  Spanish  American  commerce.  For  I  do  not  believe  that  that  coun  try 
will  ever  have  a  considerable  marine.  Mexico,  the  most  populous  part  of 
it,  has  but  two  ports,  La  Vera  Cruz  and  Acapulca,  and  neither  of  them 
very  good.  Spanish  America  has  not  the  elements  to  construct  a  marine. 
It  wants,  and  must  always  want,  hardy  seamen.  I  do  not  believe,  that, 
in  the  present  improved  state  of  navigation,  any  nation  so  far  south  will 
ever  make  a  figure  as  a  maritime  power.  If  Carthage  and  Rome,  in  an- 
cient times,  and  some  other  states  of  a  later  period,  occasionally  made 
great  exertions  on  the  water,  it  must  be  recollected  that  they  were 
principally  on  a  small  theater,  and  in  a  totally  different  state  of  the 
art  of  navigation,  or  when  there  was  no  competition  from  northern  States. 

I  am  aware  that,  in  oppositien  to  the  interest,  which  I  have  been  en- 
deavoring to  manifest,  that  this  country  has  in  the  independence  of  Span- 
ish America,  it  is  contended  that  we  shall  find  that  couutry  a  great  rival 
in  agricultural  productions.  There  is  something  so  narrow,  and  selfish,  and 
groveling,  in  this  argument,  if  founded  in  fact,  something  so  unworthy  the 
magnanimity  of  a  great  and  a  generous  people,  that  I  confess  I  have  scarce- 
ly patience  to  notice  it.  LV  it  is  not  true  to  any  extent.  Of  the  eighty  odd 
millions  of  exports,  only  about  one  million  and  a  half  consist  of  an  article 
which  can  come  into  competition  with  us,  and  that  is  cotton.  The  tobac- 
co which  Spain  derives  from  her  colonies,  is  chiefly  produced  in  her  islands. 
Breadstuffs  can  nowhere  be  raised  and  brought  to  market  in  any  amount 
materially  affecting  us.  The  table-lands  of  Mexico,  owing  to  their  eleva- 
tion, are,  it  is  true,  well  adapted  to  the  culture  of  grain  ;  but  the  expense 
and  difficulty  of  getting  it  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  the  action  of  the 
intense  heat  at  La  Vera  Cruz,  the  only  port  of  exportation,  must  always 
prevent  Mexico  from  being  an  alarming  competitor.  Spanish  America  is 
capable  of  producing  articles  so  much  more  valuable  than  those  which  we 
raise,  that  it  is  not  probable  they  will  abandon  a  more  profitable  for  a  less 
advantageous  culture,  to  come  into  competition  with  us.  The  West  India 
islands  are  well  adapted  to  the  raising  of  cotton  ;  and  yet  the  more  valua- 
ble culture  of  coffee  and  sugar  is  constantly  preferred.  Again,  Providence 
has  so  ordered  it,  that,  with  regard  to  countries  producing  articles  apparent- 
ly similar,  there  is  some  peculiarity,  resulting  from  climate,  or  from  some 
other  cause,  that  gives  to  each  an  appropriate  place  in  the  general  wants 
and  consumption  of  mankind.  The  southern  part  of  the  continent,  La 
Plata  and  Chili,  is  too  remote  to  rival  us. 

The  immense  country  watered  by  the  Mississippi  and  its  branches,  has  a 
peculiar  interest,  which  I  trust  I  shall  be  excused  for  noticing.  Having 
but  the  single  vent  of  New  Orleans  for  all  the  surplus  produce  of  their  in- 
dustry, it  is  quite  evident  that  they  would  have  a  greater  security  for  en- 
joying the  advantages  of  that  outlet,  if  the  independence  of  Mexico  upon 
any  European  power  were  effected.     Such  a  power,  owning  at  the  same 


150  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

time  Cuba,  the  great  key  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  all  the  shores  of  that 
gulf,  with  the  exception  of  the  portion  between  the  Perdido  and  Rio  del 
Norte,  must  have  a  powerful  command  over  our  interests.  Spain,  it  is  true, 
is  not  a  dangerous  neighbor  at  present ;  but,  in  the  vicissitudes  of  States, 
her  power  may  be  again  resuscitated. 

Having  shown  that  the  cause  of  the  patriots  is  just,  and  that  we  have  a 
great  interest  in  its  successful  issue,  I  will  next  inquire  what  course  of 
policy  it  becomes  us  to  adopt.  I  have  already  declared  it  to  be  one  of 
strict  and  impartial  neutrality.  It  is  not  necessary  for  their  interests,  it  is 
not  expedient  for  our  own,  that  we  should  take  part  in  the  war.  All  they 
demand  of  us  is  a  just  neutrality.  It  is  compatible  with  this  pacific  policy 
it  is  required  by  it,  that  we  should  recognize  any  established  government, 
if  there  be  any  established  government,  in  Spanish  America.  Recognition 
alone,  without  aid,  is  no  just  cause  of  war.  With  aid,  it  is  ;  not  because  of 
the  recognition,  but  because  of  the  aid ;  as  aid,  without  recognition,  is 
cause  of  war.  The  truth  of  these  propositions  I  will  maintain  upon  principle, 
by  the  practice  of  other  States  and  by  the  usage  of  our  own.  There  is  no 
common  tribunal  among  nations,  to  jn'onounce  upon  the  fact  of  the  sover- 
eignty of  a  new  State.  Each  power  does  and  must  judge  for  itself.  It  is  an 
attribute  of  sovereignty  so  to  judge.  A  nation,  in  exerting  this  incontest- 
able right,  in  pronouncing  upon  the  independence,  in  fact,  of  a  new  State, 
takes  no  part  in  the  war.  It  gives  neither  men,  nor  ships,  nor  money.  It 
merely  pronounces  that,  in  so  far  as  it  may  be  necessary  to  institute  any 
relations,  or  to  support  any  intercourse,  with  the  new  power,  that  power 
is  capable  of  maintaining  those  relations  and  authorizing  that  intercourse. 
Martens  and  other  publicists  lay  down  these  principles. 

When  the  United  Provinces  formerly  severed  themselves  from  Spain,  it 
was  about  eighty  years  before  their  independence  was  finally  recognized  by 
Spain.  Before  that  recognition,  the  United  Provinces  had  been  received 
by  all  the  rest  of  Europe,  into  the  family  of  nations.  It  is  true,  that  a  war 
broke  out  between  Philip  and  Elizabath,  but  it  proceeded  from  the  aid 
which  she  determined  to  give,  and  did  give,  to  Holland.  In  no  instance, 
I  believe,  can  it  be  shown,  from  authentic  history,  that  Spain  made  war 
upon  any  power,  on  the  sole  ground  that  such  power  had  acknowledged 
the  independence  of  the  United  Provinces. 

In  the  case  of  our  own  Revolution,  it  was  not  until  after  France  had 
given  us  aid,  and  had  determined  to  enter  into  a  treaty  of  alliance  with  us 
— a  treaty  by  which  she  guarantied  our  independence — that  England  de- 
clared war.  Holland  was  also  charged  bv  England  with  favorino-  our 
cause,  and  deviating  from  the  line  of  strict  neutrality.  And,  when  it  was 
perceived  that  she  was,  moreover,  about  to  enter  into  a  treaty  with  us, 
England  declared  war.  Even  if  it  were  shown  that  a  proud,  haughty,  and 
powerful  nation  like  England,  had  made  war  upon  other  provinces,  on  the 
ground  of  a  mere  recognition,  the  single  example  could  not  alter  the  public 
law,  or  shake  the  strength  of  a  clear  principle. 


EMANCIPATION   OF   THE   SOUTH   AMERICAN   STATES.  151 

But  what  has  been  our  uniform  practice  ?  We  have  constantly  pro- 
ceeded on  the  principle,  that  the  government  de  facto  is  that  we  can  alone 
notice.  Whatever  form  of  government  any  society  of  people  adopts,  who- 
ever they  acknowledge  as  their  sovereign,  we  consider  that  government  or 
that  sovereign  as  the  one  to  be  acknowledged  by  us.  We  have  invariably 
abstained  from  assuming  a  right  to  decide  in  favor  of  the  sovereign  de  jure, 
and  against  the  sovereign  de  facto.  That  is  a  question  for  the  nation  in 
which  it  arises  to  determine.  And,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,  the  sove- 
reign de  facto  is  the  sovereign  de  jure.  Our  own  Revolution  stands  on 
the  basis  of  the  right  of  a  people  to  change  their  rulers.  I  do  not  main- 
tain that  every  immature  revolution,  every  usurper,  before  his  power  is  con- 
solidated is  to  be  acknowledged  by  us ;  but  that  as  soon  as  stability  and 
order  are  maintained,  no  matter  by  whom,  we  always  have  considered,  and 
ought  to  consider,  the  actual  as  the  true  government.  General  Washing- 
ton, Mr.  Jefferson,  Mr.  Madison,  all,  while  they  were  respectively  presidents, 
acted  on  these  principles. 

In  the  case  of  the  French  republic,  General  Washington  did  not  wait 
until  some  of  the  crowned  heads  of  Europe  should  set  him  the  example 
of  acknowledging  it,  but  accredited  a  minister  at  once.  And  it  is  remark- 
able, that  he  was  received  before  the  government  of  the  republic  was  con- 
sidered as  established.  It  will  be  found  in  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington, 
that,  when  it  was  understood  that  a  minister  from  the  French  republic 
was  about  to  present  himself,  President  Washington  submitted  a  number 
of  questions  to  his  cabinet  for  their  consideration  and  advice,  one  of  which 
was,  whether,  upon  the  reception  of  the  minister,  he  should  be  notified  that 
America  would  suspend  the  execution  of  the  treaties  between  the  two 
countries,  until  France  had  an  established  government.  General  Washing- 
ton did  not  stop  to  inquire  whether  the  descendants  of  St.  Louis  were  to 
be  considered  as  the  legitimate  sovereigns  of  France,  and  if  the  Revolu- 
tion was  to  be  regarded  as  unauthorized  resistance  to  their  sway.  He 
saw  France,  in  fact,  under  the  government  of  those  who  had  subverted 
the  throne  of  the  Bourbons,  and  he  acknowledged  the  actual  government. 
Durino-  Mr.  Jefferson's  and  Mr.  Madison's  administrations,  when  the  Cortes 
of  Spain  and  Joseph  Bonaparte  respectively  contended  for  the  crown,  those 
enlightened  statesmen  said,  We  will  receive  a  minister  from  neither  party ; 
settle  the  question  between  yourselves,  and  we  will  acknowledge  the  party 
that  prevails.  We  have  nothing  to  do  with  your  feuds  ;  whoever  all  Spain 
acknowledges  as  her  sovereign,  is  the  only  sovereign  with  whom  we  can 
maintain  any  relations.  Mr.  Jefferson,  it  is  understood,  considered  whether 
he  should  not  receive  a  minister  from  both  parties,  and  finally  decided 
against  it,  because  of  the  inconveniences  to  this  country,  which  might  re- 
sult from  the  double  representation  of  another  power.  As  soon  as  the 
French  armies  were  expelled  from  the  peninsula,  Mr.  Madison,  still  acting 
on  the  principle  of  the  government  de  facto,  received  the  present  minister 
from  Spain.     During  all  the  phases  of  the  French  government,  republic, 


152  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

directory,  consuls,  consul  for  life,  emperor,  king,  emperor  again,  king,  our 
government  has  uniformly  received  the  minister. 

If,  then,  there  be  an  established  government  in  Spanish  America,  de- 
serving- to  rank  among  the  nations,  we  are  morally  and  politically  bound 
to  acknowledge  it,  unless  we  renounce  all  the  principles  which   ought  to 
guide,  and  which  hitherto  have  guided,  our  councils.     I  shall   now  under- 
take to  show,  that  the  United  Provinces  of  the  Rio  de  la  Plata  possess  such 
a  government.     Its  limits,  extending  from  the  South  Atlantic  ocean  to  the 
Pacific,  embrace  a  territory  equal  to  that  of  the  United  States,  certainly 
equal  to  it  exclusive  of  Louisiana.     Its  population  is  about  three  millions, 
more  than  equal  to  ours  at  the  commencement  of  our  Revolution.     That 
population  is  a  hardy,  enterprising,  and  gallant  population.     The  estab- 
lishments of  Montevideo  and  Buenos  Ayres  have,  during  different  periods 
of  their  history,  been  attacked  by  the  French,  Dutch,  Danes,  Portuguese, 
Euglish,  and  Spanish  ;  and  such  is  the  martial   character  of  the  people, 
that,  iu  every  instance,  the   attack  has  been  repulsed.     In  1807,  General 
Whitlocke,  commanding  a  powerful  English  army,  was  admitted,  under 
the  guise  of  a  friend,  into  Buenos  Ayres,  and,  as  soon  as  he  was  supposed 
to  have  demonstrated  inimical  designs,  he  was  driven  by  the  native  and 
unaided  force  of  Buenos  Ayres  from    the  country.     Buenos   Ayres  has, 
during  now  nearly  eight  years,  been,  in  point  of  fact,  in  the  enjoyment  of 
self-government.     The  capital,  containing  more  than  sixty  thousand  inhab- 
itants, has  never  been  once  lost.     As  early  as   1811,  the  regency  of  old 
Spain  made  war  upon  Buenos  Ayres,  and  the  consequence  subsequently 
was  the  capture  of  a  Spanish  army  in  Montevideo,  equal  to  that   of  Bur- 
goyne.     This  government  has  now,  in  excellent  discipline,  three  well-ap- 
pointed armies,  with  the  most  abundant  material  of  war :  the  army  of 
Chili,  the  army  of  Peru,  and  the  army  of  Buenos  Ayres.     The  first,  under 
San  Martin,  has  conquered  Chili  ;  the  second  is  penetratiug  in  a  north- 
western direction  from  Buenos  Ayres,  into  the  vice-royalty  of  Peru ;  and, 
according  to  the  last  accounts,  had  reduced  the  ancient  seat  of  empire 
of  the  Incas.     The   third  remains  at  Buenos  Ayres  to  oppose  any  force 
which  Spain  may  send  against  it.     To  show  the  condition  of  the  country 
in  July  last,  I  again  call  the  attention  of  the  committee  to   the  message 
of  the  supreme  director,  delivered  to  the  Congress  of  the   United  Prov- 
inces.    It  is  a  paper  of  the  same  authentic  character  with  the  speech  of 
the  King  of  England  on  opening  his  parliament,  or  the  message  of  the 
President  of  the  United  States  at  the  commencement  of  Congress. 

"  The  army  of  this  capital  was  organized  at  the  same  time  with  those  of  the 
Andes  and  of  the  interior ;  the  regular  force  has  been  nearly  doubled ;  the  mili- 
tia has  made  great  progress  in  military  discipline ;  our  slave  population  has  been 
formed  into  battalions,  and  taught  the  military  art  as  is  consistent  with  then- 
condition.  The  capital  is  under  no  apprehension  that  any  army  of  ten  thousand 
men  can  shake  its  liberties,  and  should  the  peninsularians  send  against  us  thrice 
that  number,  ample  provision  has  been  made  to  receive  them. 


EMANCIPATION    OF    THE    SOUTH    AMERICAN    STATES.  153 

"  Our  navy  has  been  fostered  in  all  its  branches.  The  scarcity  of  means  under 
which  we  labored  until  now,  has  not  prevented  us  from  undertaking  very  con- 
siderable operations,  with  respect  to  the  national  vessels ;  all  of  them  have  been 
repaired,  and  others  have  been  purchased  and  armed,  for  the  defense  of  our 
coasts  and  rivers ;  and  provisions  have  been  made,  should  necessity  require  it,  for 
arming  many  more,  so  that  the  enemy  will  not  find  himself  secure  from  our  re- 
prisals, even  upon  the  ocean. 

"  Our  miltary  force  at  every  point  which  it  occupies,  seems  to  be  animated 
with  the  same  spirit;  its  tactics  are  uniform,  and  have  undergone  a  rapid 
improvement  from  the  science  of  experience,  which  it  has  borrowed  from  war- 
like nations. 

"  Our  arsenals  have  been  replenished  with  arms,  and  a  sufficient  store  of  can- 
non and  munitions  of  war  have  been  provided,  to  maintain  the  contest  for 
many  years ;  and  this,  after  having  supplied  articles  of  every  description  to 
those  districts,  which  have  not  as  yet  come  into  the  union,  but  whose  connec- 
tion with  us  has  been  only  intercepted  by  reason  of  our  past  misfortunes. 

"  Our  legions  daily  receive  considerable  augmentations  from  new  levies ;  all 
our  preparations  have  been  made,  as  though  we  were  about  to  enter  upon  the 
contest  anew.  Until  now,  the  vastness  of  our  resources  was  unknown  to  us, 
and  our  enemies  may  contemplate,  with  deep  mortification  and  despair,  the 
present  flourishing  state  of  these  provinces  after  so  many  devastations. 

"  While  thus  occupied  in  providing  for  our  safety  within,  and  preparing  for 
assaults  from  without,  other  objects  of  solid  interest  have  not  been  neglected, 
and  which  hitherto  were  thought  to  oppose  insurmountable  obstacles. 

"  Our  system  of  finance  had  hitherto  been  on  a  footing  entirely  inadequate 
to  the  unfailing  supply  of  our  wants,  and  still  more  to  the  liquidation  of  the 
immense  debt  which  had  been  contracted  in  former  years.  An  unremitted  ap- 
plication to  this  object  has  enabled  me  to  create  the  means  of  satisfying  the 
creditors  of  the  State  who  had  already  abandoned  their  debts  as  lost,  as  well 
as  to  devise  a  fixed  mode,  by  which  the  taxes  may  be  made  to  fall  equally  and 
indirectly  on  the  whole  mass  of  our  population.  It  is  not  the  least  merit  of  this 
operation,  that  it  has  been  effected  in  despite  of  the  writings  by  which  it  was 
attacked,  and  which  are  but  little  creditable  to  the  intelligence  and  good  inten- 
tions of  their  authors.  At  no  other  period  have  the  public  exigences  been  so 
punctually  supplied,  nor  have  more  important  works  been  undertaken. 

"  The  people,  moreover,  have  been  relieved  from  many  burdens,  which  be- 
ing partial,  or  confined  to  particular  classes,  had  occasioned  vexation  and  dis- 
gust. Other  vexations,  scarcely  less  grievous,  will  by  degrees  be  also  suppressed, 
avoiding,  as  far  as  possible,  a  recurrence  to  loans,  which  have  drawn  after  them 
the  most  fatal  consequences  to  States.  Should  we,  however,  be  compelled  to 
resort  to  such  expedients,  the  lenders  will  not  see  themselves  in  danger  of  los- 
ing their  advances. 

"  Many  undertakings  have  been  set  on  foot  for  the  advancement  of  the  gen- 
eral prosperity.  Such  has  been  the  re-establishing  of  the  college,  heretofore 
named  San  Carlos,  but  hereafter  to  be  called  the  Union  of  the  South,  as  a  point 
designated  for  the  dissemination  of  learning  to  the  youth  of  every  part  of  the 
State,  on  the  most  extensive  scale,  for  the  attainment  of  which  object  the 
government  is  at  the  present  moment  engaged  in  putting  in  practice  every 
possible  diligence.  It  will  not  be  long  before  these  nurseries  will  flourish,  in 
which  the  liberal  and  exact  sciences  will  be  cultivated,  in  which  the  hearts  of 


154  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

those  young  men"  will  be  formed,  who  are  destined  at  some  future  day  to  add 
new  splendor  to  our  country. 

"  Such  has  been  the  establishment  of  a  military  depot  on  the  frontier,  with 
its  spacious  magazine,  a  necessary  measure  to  guard  us  from  future  dangers,  a 
work  which  does  more'  honor  to  the  prudent  foresight  of  our  country,  as  it  was 
undertaken  in  the  moment  of  its  prosperous  fortunes,  a  measure  which  must 
give  more  occasion  for  reflection  to  our  enemies  than  they  can  impose  upon  us 
by  their  boastings. 

"  Fellow  citizens,  we  owe  our  unhappy  reverses  and  calamities  to  the  deprav- 
ing system  of  our  ancient  metropolis,  which,  in  condemning  us  to  the  obscurity 
and  opprobrium  of  the  most  degraded  destiny,  has  sown  with  thorns  the  path 
that  conducts  us  to  liberty.  Tell  that  metropolis  that  even  she  may  glory  in 
your  works !  Already  have  you  cleared  all  the  rocks,  escaped  every  danger, 
and  conducted  these  provinces  to  the  flourishing  condition  in  which  we  now  be- 
hold them.  Let  the  enemies  of  your  name  contemplate  with  despair  the  ener- 
gies of  your  virtues,  and  let  the  nations  acknowledge  that  you  already  apper- 
tain to  their  illustrious  rank.  Let  us  felicitate  ourselves  on  the  blessings  we 
have  already  obtained,  and  let  us  show  to  the  world  that  we  have  learned  to 
profit  by  the  experience  of  our  past  misfortunes." 

There  is  a  spirit  of  bold  confidence  running  through  this  fine  state  paper, 
which  nothing:  but  conscious  strength  could  communicate.  Their  armies, 
their  magazines,  their  finances,  are  on  the  most  solid  and  respectable  foot- 
ing. And,  amid  all  the  cares  of  war,  and  those  incident  to  the  consol- 
idation of  their  new  institutions,  leisure  is  found  to  promote  the  interest  of 
science,  and  the  education  of  the  rising  generation.  It  is  true  the  first 
part  of  the  message  portrays  scenes  of  difficulty  and  commotion,  the  usual 
attendants  upon  revolution.  The  very  avowal  of  their  troubles  manifests, 
however,  that  they  are  subdued.  And  what  state,  passing  through  the 
agitation  of  a  great  revolution,  is  free  from  them  ?  We  had  our  tories,  our 
intrigues,  our  factions.  More  than  once  were  the  affections  of  the  country, 
and  the  confidence  of  our  councils,  attempted  to  be  shaken  in  the  great 
father  of  our  liberties.  Not  a  Spanish  bayonet  remains  within  the  immense 
extent  of  the  territories  of  the  La  Plata,  to  contest  the  authority  of  the 
actual  goverument.  It  is  free,  it  is  independent,  it  is  sovereign.  It 
manages  the  interests  of  the  society  that  submits  to  its  sway.  It  is 
capable  of  maintaining  the  relations  between  that  society  and  other  na- 
tions. 

Are  we  not  bound,  then,  upon  our  own  principles,  to  acknowledge  this 
new  republic?  If  we  do  not,  who  will?  Are  we  to  expect  that  kings 
will  set  us  the  example  of  acknowledging  the  only  republic  on  earth,  ex- 
cept our  own  ?  We  receive,  promptly  receive,  a  minister,  from  whatever 
king  sends  us  one.  From  the  great  powers  and  the  little  powers,  we  ac- 
credit ministers.  We  do  more  :  we  hasten  to  reciprocate  the  compliment; 
and,  anxious  to  manifest  our  gratitude  for  royal  civility,  we  send  for  a 
minister  (as  in  the  case  of  Sweden  and  the  Netherlands)  of  the  lowest 
grade,  one  of  the  highest  rank  recognized  by  our  laws.     We  are  the 


EMANCIPATION    OF    THE    SOUTH    AMERICAN    STATES.         155 

natural  head  of  the  American  family.  I  would  not  intermeddle  in  the 
affairs  of  Europe.  We  wisely  keep  aloof  from  their  broils.  I  would  not 
even  intermeddle  in  those  of  other  parts  of  America,  further  than  to  exert 
the  incontestable  rights  appertaining  to  us  as  a  free,  sovereign,  and  inde- 
pendent power ;  and  I  contend,  that  the  accrediting  of  a  minister  from 
the  new  republic  is  such  a  right.  We  are  bound  to  receive  their  minister, 
if  we  mean  to  be  really  neutral.  If  the  royal  belligerent  is  represented  and 
heard  at  our  government,  the  republican  belligerent  ought  also  to  be  heard. 
Otherwise,  one  party  will  be  in  the  condition  of  the  poor  patriots,  who 
were  tried  ex-parte  the  other  day,  in  the  Supreme  Court,  without  counsel, 
without  friends.  Give  Mr.  Ouis  his  conge,  or  receive  the  republican  min- 
ister.    Unless  you  do  so,  your  neutrality  is  nominal. 

I  will  next  proceed  to  inquire  into  the  consequences  of  a  recognition  of 
the  new  republic.  Will  it  involve  us  in  war  with  Spain  1  I  have  shown, 
I  trust  successfully  shown,  that  there  is  no  just  cause  of  war  to  Spain. 
Being  no  cause  of  war,  we  have  no  right  to  expect  that  war  will  ensue. 
If  Spain,  without  cause,  will  make  war,  she  may  make  it  whether  we  do 
or  do  not  acknowledge  the  republic.  But  she  will  not,  because  she  can 
not,  make  war  against  us.  I  call  the  attention  of  the  committee  to  a  re- 
port of  the  minister  of  the  Hacienda  to  the  King  of  Spain,  presented 
about  eight  months  ago.  A  more  beggarly  account  of  empty  boxes  was 
never  rendered.  The  picture  of  Mr.  Dallas,  sketched  in  his  celebrated  re- 
port during  the  last  war,  may  be  contemplated  without  emotion,  after 
surveying  that  of  Mr.  Gary.  The  expenses  of  the  current  year  required 
eight  hundred  and  thirty  million  two  hundred  and  sixty-seven  thousand 
eight  hundred  and  twenty-nine  reals,  and  the  deficit  of  the  income  is  rep- 
resented as  two  hundred  and  thirty-three  million  one  hundred  and  forty 
thousand  nine  hundred  and  thirty-two  reals.  This,  besides  an  immense 
mass  of  unliquidated  debt,  which  the  minister  acknowledges  the  utter  in- 
ability of  the  country  to  pay,  although  bound  in  honor  to  redeem  it.  He 
states,  that  the  vassals  of  the  king  are  totally  unable  to  submit  to  any  new 
taxes,  and  the  country  is  without  credit,  so  as  to  render  anticipation  by 
loans  wholly  impracticable.  Mr.  Gary  appears  to  be  a  virtuous  man,  who 
exhibits  frankly  the  naked  truth ;  and  yet  such  a  minister  acknowledges, 
that  the  decorum  due  to  one  single  family,  that  of  a  monarch,  does  not 
admit,  in  this  critical  condition  of  his  country,  any  reduction  of  the 
enormous  sum  of  upward  of  fifty-six  millions  of  reals,  set  apart  to  defray 
the  expenses  of  that  family!  He  states  that  a  foreign  war  would  be  the 
greatest  of  all  calamities,  and  one  which,  being  unable  to  provide  for  it, 
they  ought  to  employ  every  possible  means  to  avert.  He  proposed  some 
inconsiderable  contribution  from  the  clergy,  and  the  whole  body  was  in- 
stantly in  an  uproar.  Indeed,  I  have  no  doubt  that,  surrounded  as  Mr. 
Gary  is  by  corruption,  by  intrigue,  and  folly,  and  imbecility,  he  will  bo 
compelled  to  retire,  if  he  has  not  already  been  dismissed,  from  a  post  for 
which  he  has  too  much  integrity.     It  has  been  now  about  four  years  since 


15G  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

the  restoration  of  Ferdinand  ;  and  if,  during  that  period,  the  whole  ener- 
gies of  the  monarchy  have  been  directed,  unsuccessfully,  against  the 
weakest  and  most  vulnerable  of  all  the  American  possessions,  Venezuela, 
how  is  it  impossible  for  Spain  to  encounter  the  difficulties  of  a  new  war 
with  this  country  ?  Morillo  has  been  sent  out  with  one  of  the  finest 
armies  that  has  ever  left  the  shores  of  Europe — consisting  of  ten  thousand 
men,  chosen  from  all  the  veterans  who  have  fought  in  the  peninsula.  It 
has  subsequently  been  reinforced  with  about  three  thousand  more.  And 
yet,  during  the  last  summer,  it  was  reduced,  by  the  sword  and  the  climate, 
to  about  four  thousand  effective  men.  And  Venezuela,  containing  a  popula- 
tion of  only  about  one  million,  of  which  near  two  thirds  are  persons  of 
color,  remains  unsubdued.  The  little  island  of  Margaritta,  whose  popula- 
tion is  less  than  twenty  thousand  inhabitants — a  population  fighting  for 
liberty,  with  more  than  Roman  valor — has  compelled  that  army  to  retire 
upon  the  main.  Spain,  by  the  late  accounts,  appeared  to  be  deliberating 
upon  the  necessity  of  resorting  to  that  measure  of  conscription,  for  which 
Bonaparte  has  been  so  much  abused.  The  effect  of  a  war  with  this  coun- 
try would  be,  to  insure  success,  beyond  all  doubt,  to  the  cause  of  Amer 
ican  independence.  Those  parts  even,  over  which  Spain  has  some  prospect 
of  maintaining  her  dominions,  would  probably  be  put  in  jeopardy.  Such 
a  war  would  be  attended  with  the  immediate  and  certain  loss  of  Florida. 
Commanding  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  as  we  should  be  enabled  to  do  by  our 
navy,  blockading  the  port  of  Havana,  the  port  of  La  Vera  Cruz,  and  the 
coast  of  Terra  Firma,  and  throwing  munitions  of  war  into  Mexico,  Cuba 
would  be  menanced,  Mexico  emancipated,  and  Morillo's  army,  deprived  of 
supplies,  now  drawn  principally  from  this  country  through  the  Havana, 
compelled  to  surrender.  The  war,  I  verily  believe,  would  be  terminated  in 
less  than  two  years,  supposing  no  other  power  to  interpose. 

Will  the  allies  interfere  ?  If,  by  the  exertion  of  an  unquestionable  at- 
tribute of  a  sovereign  power,  we  should  give  no  just  cause  of  war  to  Spain 
herself,  how  can  it  be  pretended  that  we  should  furnish  even  a  specious 
pretext  to  the  allies  for  making  war  upon  us  ?  On  what  ground  could 
they  attempt  to  justify  a  rupture  with  us,  for  the  exercise  of  a  right  which 
we  hold  in  common  with  them,  and  with  every  other  independent  state  ? 
But  we  have  a  surer  guaranty  against  their  hostility,  in  their  interests. 
That  all  the  allies  have  an  interest  in  the  independence  of  Spanish 
America,  is  perfectly  evident.  On  what  ground,  I  ask,  is  it  likely,  then, 
that  they  would  support  Spain,  in  opposition  to  their  own  decided  inter- 
ests ?  To  crush  the  spirit  of  revolt,  and  prevent  the  progress  of  free 
principles?  Nations,  like  individuals,  do  not  sensibly  feel,  and  seldom  act 
upon  dangers  which  are  remote  either  in  time  or  place.  Of  Spanish 
America,  but  little  is  known  by  the  great  body  of  the  population  of 
Europe.  Even  in  this  country,  the  most  astonishing  ignorance  prevails 
respecting  it.  Those  European  statesmen  who  are  acquainted  with  the 
country,  will  reflect,  that,  tossed  by  a  great  revolution,  it  will  most  prob- 


EMANCIPATION   OF    THE    SOUTH    AMERICAN    STATES.  157 

ably  constitute  four  or  five  several  nations,  and  that  the  ultimate  modifica- 
tion of  all  their  various  governments  is  by  no  means  absolutely  certain. 
But  I  entertain  no  doubt  that  the  principle  of  cohesion  among  the  allies  is 
gone.  It  was  annihilated  in  the  memorable  battle  of  Waterloo.  When 
the  question  was,  whether  one  should  engross  all,  a  common  danger 
united  all.  How  long  was  it,  even  with  a  clear  perception  of  that  danger, 
before  an  effective  coalition  could  be  formed  ?  How  often  did  one  power 
stand  by,  unmoved  and  indifferent  to  the  fate  of  its  neighbor,  although  the 
destruction  of  that  neighbor  removed  the  only  barrier  to  an  attack  upon 
itself?  No  ;  the  consummation  of  the  cause  of  the  allies  was,  and  all  his- 
tory and  all  experience  will  prove  it,  the  destruction  of  the  alliance.  The 
principle  is  totally  changed.  It  is  no  longer  a  common  struggle  against 
the  colossal  power  of  Bonaparte,  but  it  has  become  a  common  scramble  for 
the  spoils  of  his  empire.  There  may,  indeed,  be  one  or  two  points  on 
which  a  common  interest  still  exists,  such  as  the  convenience  of  subsisting 
their  armies  on  the  vitals  of  poor  suffering  France.  But  as  for  action,  for 
new  enterprises,  there  is  no  principle  of  unity,  there  can  be  no  accordance 
of  interests,  or  of  views,  among  them. 

What  is  the  coudition  in  which  Europe  is  left  after  all  its  efforts?  It 
is  divided  into  two  great  powers,  one  having  the  undisputed  command  of 
the  land,  the  other  of  the  water.  Paris  is  transferred  to  St.  Petersburg, 
and  the  navies  of  Europe  are  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  or  concentrated  in 
the  ports  of  England.  Russia — that  huge  land  animal — awing  by  the 
dread  of  her  vast  power  all  continental  Europe,  is  seeking  to  encompass 
the  Porte  ;  and,  constituting  herself  the  kraken  of  the  ocean,  is  anxious  to 
lave  her  enormous  sides  in  the  more  genial  waters  of  the  Mediterranean. 
It  is  said,  I  know,  that  she  has  indicated  a  disposition  to  take  part  with 
Spain.  No  such  thing.  She  has  sold  some  old  worm-eaten,  decayed,  fir- 
built  ships  to  Spain,  but  the  crews  which  navigate  them  are  to  return  from 
the  port  of  delivery,  and  the  bonus  she  is  to  get,  I  believe  to  be  the  island 
of  Minorca,  in  conformity  with  the  cardinal  point  of  her  policy.  France 
is  greatly  interested  in  whatever  would  extend  her  commerce  and  regener- 
ate her  marine,  and  consequently,  more  than  any  other  power  of  Europe, 
England  alone  excepted,  is  concerned  in  the  independence  of  Spanish 
America.  I  do  not  despair  of  France  so  long  as  France  has  a  legislative 
body  collected  from  all  its  parts,  the  great  repository  of  its  wishes  and  its 
will.  Already  has  that  body  manifested  a  spirit  of  considerable  independ- 
ence. And  those  who,  conversant  with  French  history,  know  what  mag- 
nanimous stands  have  been  made  by  the  parliaments,  bodies  of  limited 
extent,  against  the  royal  prerogative,  will  be  able  to  appreciate  justly  the 
moral  force  of  such  a  legislative  body.  While  it  exists,  the  true  interests 
of  France  will  be  cherished  and  pursued  on  points  of  foreign  policy,  in  op- 
position to  the  pride  and  interests  of  the  Bourbon  family,  if  the  actual 
dynasty,  impelled  by  this  pride,  should  seek  to  subserve  these  interests. 

England  finds  that,  after  all  her  exertions,  she  is  everywhere  despised 


158  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

on  the  continent ;  her  maritime  power  viewed  with  jealousy ;  her  com- 
merce subjected  to  the  most  onerous  restrictions ;  selfishness  imputed  to 
all  her  policy.  All  accounts  from  France  represent  that  every  party, 
Bonapartists,  Jacobins,  royalists,  moderes,  ultras,  all  burn  with  indignation 
toward  England,  and  pant  for  an  opportunity  to  avenge  themselves  on  the 
power  to  whom  they  ascribe  all  their  disasters. 

It  is  impossible  that  with  powers,  between  whom  so  much  cordial  dis- 
like, so  much  incongruity  exists,  there  can  be  any  union  or  concert. 
While  the  free  principles  of  the  French  Revolution  remained,  those  prin- 
ciples were  so  alarming  to  the  stability  of  thrones,  there  never  was  any 
successful  or  cordial  union ;  coalition  after  coalition,  wanting  the  spirit  of 
union,  was  swept  away  by  the  overwhelming  power  of  France.  It  was 
not  until  those  principles  were  abandoned,  and  Bonaparte  had  erected  on 
their  ruins  his  stupendous  fabric  of  universal  emj)ire  ;  nor,  indeed,  until 
after  the  frosts  of  heaven  favored  the  cause  of  Europe,  that  an  effective 
coalition  was  formed.  No,  the  complaisance  inspired  in  the  allies  from 
unexpected,  if  not  undeserved  success,  may  keej)  them  nominally  together ; 
but  for  all  purposes  of  united  and  combined  action,  the  alliance  is  gone ; 
and  I  do  not  believe  in  the  chimera  of  their  crusading  against  the  inde- 
pendence of  a  country,  whose  liberation  would  essentially  promote  all  their 
respective  interests. 

But  the  question  of  the  interposition  of  the  allies,  in  the  event  of  our 
recognizing  the  new  republic,  resolves  itself  into  a  question,  whether  En- 
gland, in  such  an  event,  would  make  war  upon  us ;  if  it  can  be  shown 
that  England  would  not,  it  results,  either  that  the  other  allies  would  not, 
or  that,  if  they  should,  in  which  case  England  would  most  probably  sup- 
port the  cause  of  America,  it  would  be  a  war  without  the  maritime  ability 
to  maintain  it.  I  contend  that  England  is  alike  restrained  by  her  honor 
and  by  her  interests  from  waging  war  against  us,  and  consequently  against 
Spanish  America  also,  for  an  acknowledgment  of  the  independence  of  the 
new  State.  England  encouraged  and  fomented  the  revolt  of  the  colonies 
as  early  as  June,  1797.  Sir  Thomas  Picton,  governor  of  Trinidad,  in  vir- 
tue of  orders  from  the  British  minister  of  foreign  affairs,  issued  a  procla- 
mation, in  which  he  expressly  assures  the  inhabitants  of  Terra  Firma  that 
the  British  government  will  aid  in  establishing  their  independence  : 

"  With  regard  to  the  hope  you  entertain  of  raising  the  spirits  of  those  per- 
sons with  whom  you  are  in  correspondence,  toward  encouraging  the  inhabitants 
to  resist  the  oppressive  authority  of  their  government,  I  have  little  more  to  say 
than  that  they  may  be  certain,  that  whenever  they  are  in  that  disposition,  they 
may  receive  at  your  hands  all  the  succors  to  be  expected  from  his  Britannic 
majesty,  be  it  with  forces  or  with  arms  and  ammunition  to  any  extent ;  with  the 
assurance  that  the  views  of  his  Britannic  majesty  go  no  further  than  to  secure 
to  them  their  independence,"  and  so  forth. 

In  the  prosecution  of  the  same  object,  Great  Britain  defrayed  the  ex- 


EMANCIPATION   OF   THE   SOUTH   AMERICAN   STATES.  159 

penses  of  the  famous  expedition  of  Miranda.  England,  in  1811,  when  she 
was  in  the  most  intimate  relations  with  Spain,  then  struggling  against  the 
French  power,  assumed  the  attitude  of  a  mediator  between  the  colonies, 
and  the  peninsula.  The  terms,  on  which  she  conceived  her  mediation 
could  alone  be  effectual,  were  rejected  by  the  Cortes,  at  the  lowest  state  of 
the  Spanish  power.  Among  these  terms,  England  required  for  the  colo- 
nies a  perfect  freedom  of  commerce,  allowing  only  some  degree  of  prefer- 
ence to  Spain ;  that  the  appointments  of  viceroys  and  governors  should  be 
made  indiscriminately  from  Spanish  Americans  and  Spaniards  ;  and  that 
the  interior  government,  and  every  branch  of  public  administration,  should 
be  intrusted  to  the  cabildo,  or  municipalities,  and  so  forth.  If  Spain,  when 
Spain  Avas  almost  reduced  to  the  island  of  St.  Leon,  then  rejected  those 
conditions,  will  she  now  consent  to  them,  amounting,  as  they  do,  substan- 
tially, to  the  independence  of  Spanish  America  ?  If  England,  devoted  as 
she  was  at  that  time  to  the  cause  of  the  peninsula,  even  then  thought 
those  terms  due  to  the  colonies,  will  she  now,  when  no  particular  motive 
exists  for  cherishing  the  Spanish  power,  and  after  the  ingratitude  with 
which  Spain  has  treated  her,  think  that  the  colonies  ought  to  submit  to 
less  favorable  conditions  ?  And  would  not  England  stand  disgraced  in  the 
eyes  of  the  whole  world,  if,  after  having  abetted  and  excited  a  revolution, 
she  should  now  attempt  to  reduce  the  colonies  to  unconditional  submission, 
or  should  make  war  upon  us  for  acknowledging  that  independence  which 
she  herself  sought  to  establish  ? 

No  guaranty  for  the  conduct  of  nations  or  individuals  ought  to  be 
stronger  than  that  which  honor  imposes ;  but  for  those  who  put  no  confi- 
dence in  its  obligations,  I  have  an  argument  to  urge  of  more  conclusive 
force.  It  is  founded  upon  the  interest  of  England.  Excluded  almost  as 
she  is  from  the  continent,  the  commerce  of  America,  South  and  North,  is 
worth  to  her  more  than  the  commerce  of  the  residue  of  the  world.  That 
to  all  Spanish  America  has  been  alone  estimated  at  fifteen  millions  sterling. 
Its  aggregate  value  to  Spanish  America  and  the  United  States  may  be 
fairly  stated  at  upward  of  one  hundred  thousand  dollars.  The  effect  of  a 
war  with  the  two  countries  would  be,  to  divest  England  of  this  great  inter- 
est, at  a  moment  when  she  is  anxiously  engaged  in  repairing  the  ravages 
of  the  European  war.  Looking  to  the  present  moment  only,  and  merely 
to  the  interests  of  commerce,  England  is  concerned  more  than  even  this 
country,  in  the  success  of  the  cause  of  independence  in  Spanish  America. 
The  reduction  of  the  Spanish  power  in  America  has  been  the  constant  and 
favorite  aim  of  her  policy  for  two  centuries ;  she  must  blot  out  her  whole 
history,  reverse  the  maxims  of  all  her  illustrious  statesmen,  extinguish  the 
spirit  of  commerce  which  animates,  directs,  and  controls  all  her  movements, 
before  she  can  render  herself  accessory  to  the  subjugation  of  Spanish 
America.  No  commercial  advantages  which  Spain  may  offer  by  treaty, 
can  possess  the  security  for  her  trade,  which  independence  would  commu- 
nicate.    The  one  would  be  most  probably  of  limited  duration,  and  liable 


160  SPEECHES   OF    HENKY    CLAY. 

to  violation  from  policy,  from  interest,  or  from  caprice.  The  other  would 
be  as  permanent  as  independence.  That  I  do  not  mistake  the  views  of  the 
British  cabinet,  the  recent  proclamation  of  the  prince-regent  I  think  proves. 
The  committee  will  remark,  that  the  document  does  not  describe  the  pa- 
triots as  rebels,  or  insurgents,  but  using  a  term  which  I  have  no  doubt  has 
been  well  weighed,  it  declares  the  existence  of  a  "  state  of  warfare."  And 
with  regard  to  English  subjects,  who  are  in  the  armies  of  Spain,  although 
they  entered  the  service  without  restriction  as  to  their  military  duties,  it  re- 
quires that  they  shall  not  take  part  against  the  colonies.  The  subjects  of 
England  freely  supply  the  patriots  with  arms  and  ammunition,  and  an  hon- 
orable friend  of  mine  (Colonel  Johnson)  has  just  received  a  letter  from  one 
of  the  West  India  islands,  stating  the  arrival  there  from  England  of  the 
skeletons  of  three  regiments,  with  many  of  the  men  to  fill  them,  destined 
to  aid  the  patriots.  In  the  Quarterly  Review  of  November  last,  a  journal 
devoted  to  the  ministry,  and  a  work  of  the  highest  authority,  as  it  respects 
their  views,  the  policy  of  neutrality  is  declared  and  supported  as  the  true 
policy  of  England ;  and  that,  even  if  the  United  States  were  to  take  part 
in  the  war  ;  and  Spain  is  expressly  notified,  that  she  can  not  and  must  not 
expect  aid  from  England. 

"  In  arguing,  therefore,  for  the  advantage  of  a  strict  neutrality,  we  must  en- 
ter an  early  protest  against  any  imputations  of  hostility  to  the  cause  of  genuine 
freedom,  or  of  any  passion  for  despotism  and  the  inquisition.  We  are  no  more 
the  panegyrists  of  legitimate  authority  in  all  times,  circumstances,  and  situations, 
than  we  are  advocates  for  revolution  in  the  abstract,"  and  so  forth.  "  But  it  has 
been  plausibly  asserted,  that,  by  abstaining  from  interference  in  the  affairs  of 
South  America,  we  are  surrendering  to  the  United  States  all  the  advantages 
which  might  be  secured  to  ourselves  from  this  revolution ;  that  we  are  assisting 
to  increase  the  trade  and  power  of  a  nation  which  alone  can  ever  be  the  mari- 
time rival  of  England.  It  appears  to  us  extremely  doubtful,  whether  any  ad- 
vantage, commercial  or  political,  can  be  lost  to  England  by  a  neutral  conduct; 
it  must  be  observed,  that  the  United  States  themselves,  have  given  every  public 
proof  of  their  intention  to  pursue  the  same  line  of  policy.  But  admitting  that 
this  conduct  is  nothing  more  than  a  decent  pretext ;  or  admitting,  still  farther, 
that  they  will  afford  to  the  independents  direct  and  open  assistance,  our  view  of 
the  case  would  remain  precisely  the  same,"  and  so  forth.  <(  To  persevere  in  force, 
unaided,  is  to  miscalculate  her  (Spain's)  own  resources,  even  to  infatuation.  To 
expect  the  aid  of  an  ally  in  such  a  cause  would,  if  that  ally  were  England,  be 
to  suppose  this  country  as  forgetful  of  its  own  past  history  as  of  its  immediate 
interests  and  duties.  Far  better  would  it  be  for  Spain,  instead  of  calling  for  our 
aid,  to  profit  by  our  experience ;  and  to  substitute,  ere  it  be  too  late,  for  efforts 
like  those  by  which  the  North  American  colonies  were  lost  to  this  country,  the 
conciliatory  measures  by  which  they  might  have  been  retained." 

In  the  case  of  the  struggle  between  Spain  and  her  colonies,  England, 
for  once,  at  least,  has  manifested  a  degree  of  wisdom  highly  deserving  our 
imitation,  but  unfortunately  the  very  reverse  of  her  course  has  been  pur- 


EMANCIPATION   OF   THE   SOUTH   AMERICAN    STATES.         161 

sued  by  us.  She  has  so  conducted,  by  operating  upon  the  hopes  of  the 
two  parties,  as  to  keep  on  the  best  terms  with  both  ;  to  enjoy  all  the  ad- 
vantages of  the  rich  commerce  of  both.  We  have,  by  a  neutrality  bill 
containing  unprecedented  features,  and  still  more  by  a  late  executive  meas- 
ure, to  say  the  least  of  it,  of  doubtful  constitutional  character,  contrived  to 
dissatisfy  both  parties.  Wc  have  the  confidence  neither  of  Spain  nor  the 
colonies. 

It  remains  for  me  to  defend  the  proposition  which  I  meant  to  submit, 
from  an  objection  which  I  have  heard  intimated,  that  it  interferes  with  the 
duties  assigned  to  the  executive  branch.  On  this  subject  I  feel  the  greatest 
solicitude  ;  for  no  man  more  than  myself,  respects  the  preservation  of  the 
independence  of  the  several  departments  of  government,  in  the  constitu- 
tional orbits  which  are  prescribed  to  them.  It  is  my  favorite  maxim,  that 
each,  acting  within  its  proper  sphere,  should  move  with  its  constitutional 
independence,  and  under  its  constitutional  responsibility,  without  influence 
from  any  other.  I  am  perfectly  aware  that  the  Constitution  of  the  United 
States — and  I  admit  the  proposition  in  its  broadest  sense — confides  to  the 
executive  the  reception  and  the  deputation  of  ministers.  But,  in  relation 
to  the  latter  operation,  Congress  has  concurrent  will  in  the  power  of  pro- 
viding for  the  payment  of  their  salaries.  The  instrument  nowhere  says  or 
implies  that  the  executive  act  of  sending  a  minister  to  a  foreign  country, 
shall  precede  the  legislative  act  which  provides  for  the  payment  of  his 
salary.  And,  in  point  of  fact,  our  statutory  code  is  full  of  examples  of 
legislative  action  prior  to  executive  action,  both  in  relation  to  the  deputa- 
tion of  agents  abroad,  and  to  the  subject-matter  of  treaties.  Perhaps  the 
act  of  sending  a  minister  abroad,  and  the  act  of  providing  for  the  allow- 
ance of  his  salary,  ought  to  be  simultaneous ;  but  if,  in  the  order  of  pre- 
cedence, there  be  more  reason  on  the  one  side  than  on  the  other,  I  think 
it  is  in  favor  of  the  priority  of  the  legislative  act,  as  the  safer  depository 
of  power.  When  a  minister  is  sent  abroad,  although  the  legislature  may 
be  disposed  to  think  his  mission  useless ;  although,  if  previously  con- 
sulted, they  would  have  said  they  would  not  consent  to  pay  such  a  min- 
ister ;  the  duty  is  delicate  and  painful  to  refuse  to  pay  the  salary  promised 
to  him  whom  the  executive  has  even  unnecessarily  sent  abroad.  I  can 
illustrate  my  idea  by  the  existing  missions  to  Sweden  and  to  the  Nether- 
lands. I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying,  that  if  we  had  not  ministers  of  the 
first  grade  there,  and  if  the  legislature  were  asked,  prior  to  sending  them, 
whether  it  would  consent  to  pay  ministers  of  that  grade,  I  would  not,  and 
I  believe  Congress  would  not,  consent  to  pay  them. 

If  it  be  urged  that  by  avowing  our  willingness  in  a  legislative  act,  to  pay 
a  minister  not  yet  sent,  and  whom  the  president  may  think  it  improper  to 
send  abroad,  we  operate  upon  the  president  by  all  the  force  of  our  opinion ; 
it  may  be  retorted,  that  when  we  are  called  upon  to  pay  any  minister,  sent 
under  similar  circumstances,  we  are  operated  upon  by  all  the  force  of  the 
president's  opinion.     The  true  theory  of  our  government,  at  least,  supposes 

11 


162  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY   CLAY. 

that  each  of  the  two  departments,  acting  on  its  proper  constitutional  re- 
sponsibility, will  decide  according  to  its  best  judgment,  under  all  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  case.  If  we  make  the  previous  appropriation,  we  act 
upon  our  constitutional  responsibility,  and  the  president  afterward  will  pro- 
ceed upon  his.  And  so  if  he  makes  the  previous  appointment.  We  have 
the  right,  after  a  minister  is  sent  abroad,  and  we  are  called  upon  to  pay 
him,  and  we  ought  to  deliberate  upon  the  propriety  of  bis  mission  ;  we 
may  and  ought  to  grant  or  withhold  his  salary.  If  this  power  of  delibe- 
ration is  conceded  subsequently  to  the  deputation  of  the  minister,  it  must 
exist  prior  to  that  deputation.  Whenever  we  deliberate,  we  deliberate 
under  our  constitutional  responsibility.  Pass  the  amendment  I  propose, 
and  it  will  be  passed  under  that  responsibility.  Then  the  president,  when 
he  deliberates  on  the  propriety  of  the  mission,  will  act  under  his  constitu- 
tional responsibility.  Each  branch  of  government,  moving  in  its  proper 
sphere,  will  act  with  as  much  freedom  from  the  influence  of  the  other  as 
is  practically  attainable. 

There  is  great  reason,  from  the  peculiar  character  of  the  American  gov- 
ernment, for  a  perfect  understanding  between  the  legislative  and  executive 
branches,  in  relation  to  the  acknowledgment  of  a  new  power.  Everywhere 
else  the  power  of  declaring  war  resides  with  the  executive.  Here  it  is 
deposited  with  the  Legislature.  If,  contrary  to  my  opinion,  there  be  even 
a  risk  that  the  acknowledgment  of  a  new  state  may  lead  to  war,  it  is  ad- 
visable that  the  step  should  not  be  taken  without  a  previous  knowledge  of 
the  will  of  the  war-making  branch.  I  am  disposed  to  give  to  the  presi- 
dent all  the  confidence  which  he  must  derive  from  the  unequivocal  expres- 
sion of  our  will.  This  expression  I  know  may  be  given  in  the  form  of  an 
abstract  resolution,  declaratory  of  that  will ;  but  I  prefer  at  this  time  pro- 
posing an  act  of  practical  legislation.  And  if  I  have  been  so  fortunate  as 
to  communicate  to  the  committee,  in  any  thing  like  that  degree  of  strength 
in  which  I  entertain  them,  the  convictions  that  the  cause  of  the  patriots  is 
just ;  that  the  character  of  the  war,  as  waged  by  Spain,  should  induce  us 
to  wish  them  success ;  that  we  have  a  great  interest  in  that  success ; 
that  this  interest,  as  well  as  our  neutral  attitude,  requires  us  to  ac- 
knowledge any  established  government  in  Spanish  America  ;  that  the 
United  Provinces  of  the  river  Platte  is  such  a  government ;  that  we  may 
safely  acknowledge  its  independence,  without  danger  of  war  from  Spain, 
from  the  allies,  or  from  England  ;  and  that,  without  unconstitutional  inter- 
ference with  the  executive  power,  with  peculiar  fitness,  we  may  express,  in 
an  act  of  approbation,  our  sentiments,  leaving  him  to  an  exercise  of  a  just 
and  responsible  discretion  ;  I  hope  the  committee  will  adopt  the  proposi- 
tion which  I  have  now  the  honor  of  presenting  to  them,  after  a  respectful 
tender  of  my  acknowledgments  for  their  attention  and  kindness,  during,  I 
fear,  the  tedious  period  I  have  been  so  unprofitably  trespassing  upon  their 
patience. 


EMANCIPATION   OF   SOUTH  AMERICA, 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OP  REPRESENTATIVES,  MARCH  28,  1818. 

[The  following  speech,  as  will  be  seen,  is  a  mere  continuation 
of  the  preceding  one,  after  the  subject  had  been  debated  by- 
others,  and  in  reply  to  the  opponents  of  Mr.  Clay's  amendment. 
The  prima  facie  views  of  the  former  speech,  occupy  a  distinct 
position  on  the  naked  merits  of  the  question  ;  whereas  this 
second  speech  is  characterised  chiefly  by  a  refutation  of  the 
objections  which  had  been  raised  against  Mr.  Clay's  proposal. 
His  motion,  doubtless,  took  the  House  by  surprise,  as  being  too 
bold  a  measure,  though  we  can  not  now  see  why  it  should  be  so 
regarded,  especially  in  the  light  of  Mr.  Clay's  argument.  The 
prudence  of  its  opponents  strikes  the  reader  of  history  as  a  cen- 
surable and  truckling  timidity.  In  the  first  place,  there  was  no 
cause  of  war  in  what  Mr.  Clay  proposed,  and  it  was  absurd  to 
suppose  that  Spain  would  resent  it  as  such,  in  the  condition  of 
her  finances  ;  and  in  the  protracted  struggle  of  these  South 
American  provinces  against  the  mother  country,  they  had 
acquired  advantages  sufficient  to  justify  a  recognition  of  their 
independence,  by  all  the  world.  They  were  in  fact  independent, 
and  were  becoming  more  and  more  so  every  year.  Spain  could 
neither  hold,  nor  reduce  them.  Still  it  was  a  difficult  matter  to 
persuade  the  government  of  the  United  States  of  North  America 
to  recognize  this  position  of  our  southern  and  sister  republics, 
and  Mr.  Clay  was  the  only  man  that  would  take  the  lead  in  it. 
To  his  immortal  honor,  he  allowed  himself  to  be  borne  onward 
by  the  current  of  his  sympathies — a  movement  visible  to  all  the 
world,  and  which  made  an  ineffaceable  impression  of  gratitude 
on  the  people  of  those  countries  whose  cause  and  independence 
he  so  gallantly  advocated  in  the  time  of  their  greatest  need. 
Henry  Clay,  of  North  America,  was  loved  by  them,  celebrated  in 
song,  and  monuments  of  gratitude  were  erected  to  his  memory, 
which  are  standing  to  this  day.  Thanks  were  voted  him  by  the 
governments  of  those  States,  and  his  name,  as  a  heroic  advocate 
of  their  independence,  is  incorporated  with  their  history. 


164  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY   CLAY. 

But  Mr.  Clay's  amendment  was  lost  by  a  vote  of  one  hundred 
and  fifteen  against  forty-five.  Even  forty-five  was  a  strong  vote, 
considering  that  the  motion  was  sprung  upon  the  House  so  sud- 
denly. The  recognition  of  the  independence  of  the  South 
American  States,  by  the  government  of  the  United  States,  was 
now  in  Mr.  Clay's  hands,  and  it  remained  for  him  to  achieve  its 
consummation  as  he  did  two  years  afterward.] 

Mr.  CnAiRMAN  :  The  first  objection  which  I  think  it  incumbent  on  me 
to  notice,  is  that  of  my  friend  from  South  Carolina  (Mr.  Lowndes),  who  op- 
posed the  form  of  the  proposition,  as  being  made  on  a  general  appropria- 
tion bill,  on  which  he  appeared  to  think  nothing  ought  to  be  engrafted 
which  was  likely  to  give  rise  to  a  difference  between  the  two  branches 
of  the  Legislature.  If  the  gentleman  himself  had  always  acted  on  this 
principle,  his  objection  would  be  entitled  to  more  weight ;  but,  the  item  in 
the  appropriation  bill  next  following  this,  and  reported  by  the  gentleman 
himself,  is  infinitely  more  objectionable — which  is,  an  appropriation  of 
thirty  thousand  dollars  for  defraying  the  expenses  of  three  commissioners, 
appointed  or  proposed  to  be  paid  in  an  unconstitutional  form.  It  can  not 
be  expected  that  a  general  appropriation  bill  will  ever  pass  without  some 
objectionable  clauses,  and  in  case  of  a  difference  between  the  two  Houses 
(a  difference  which  we  have  no  right  to  anticipate  in  this  instance),  which 
can  not  be  compromised  as  to  any  article,  the  obvious  course  is,  to  omit 
such  article  altogether,  retaining  all  the  others ;  and,  in  a  case  of  this 
character,  relative  to  brevet  pay,  which  has  occurred  during  the  present 
session,  such  has  been  the  ground  the  gentleman  himself  has  taken  in  a 
conference  with  the  Senate,  of  which  he  is  a  manager. 

The  gentleman  from  South  Carolina,  has  professed  to  concur  with  me  in 
a  great  many  of  his  general  propositions ;  and  neither  he  nor  any  other 
gentleman  has  disagreed  with  me,  that  the  mere  recognition  of  the  inde- 
pendence of  the  provinces  is  no  cause  of  war  with  Spain,  except  the  gen- 
tleman from  Maryland  (Mr.  Smith),  to  whom  I  recommend,  without 
intending  disrespect  to  him,  to  confine  himself  to  the  operation  of  com- 
merce, rather  than  undertake  to  expound  questions  of  public  law ;  for  I 
can  assure  the  gentleman,  that,  although  he  may  make  some  figure,  with 
his  practical  knowledge,  in  the  one  case,  he  will  not  in  the  other.  No 
man,  except  the  gentleman  from  Maryland,  has  had  what  I  should  call  the 
hardihood  to  contend,  that,  on  the  ground  of  principle  and  mere  public 
law,  the  exercise  of  the  right  of  recognizing  another  power  is  the  cause  of 
war.  But  though  the  gentleman  from  South  Carolina  admitted,  that  the 
recognition  would  be  no  cause  of  war,  and  that  it  was  not  likely  to  lead  to 
a  war  with  Spain,  we  find  him,  shortly  after,  getting  into  a  war  with  Spain, 
how,  I  do  not  see,  and  by  some  means,  which  he  did  not  deign  to  discover 
to  us  getting  us  into  a  war  with  England  also.     Having  satisfied  himself, 


EMANCIPATION   OF   SOUTH  AMEEICA.  165 

by  this  course  of  reasoning,  the  gentleman  has  discovered,  that  the  finances 
of  Spain  are  in  a  most  favorable  condition.  On  this  part  of  the  subject,  it 
is  not  necessary  for  me  to  say  any  thing  after  what  the  committee  has 
heard  from  the  eloquent  gentleman  from  Massachusetts  (Mr.  Holmes), 
whose  voice,  in  a  period  infinitely  more  critical  in  our  affairs  than  the 
present,  has  been  heard  with  so  much  delight  from  the  East  in  support  of 
the  rights  and  honor  of  the  country.  He  has  clearly  shown,  that  there  is 
no  parallel  between  the  state  of  Spain  and  of  this  country — the  one  of  a 
country  whose  resources  are  completely  impoverished  and  exhausted,  the 
other  of  a  country  whose  resources  are  almost  untouched.  But,  I  would  ask 
of  the  gentleman  from  South  Carolina,  if  he  can  conceive  that  a  State,  in 
the  condition  of  Spain,  whose  minister  of  the  treasury  admits  that  the 
people  have  no  longer  the  means  of  paying  new  taxes — a  nation  with  an 
immense  mass  of  floating  debt,  and  totally  without  credit — can  feel  any 
anxiety  to  engage  in  a  war  with  a  nation  like  this,  whose  situation  is,  in 
every  possible  view,  directly  the  reverse  ?  I  ask,  if  an  annual  revenue, 
equal  only  to  five  eighths  of  the  annual  expenditure,  exhibits  a  financial 
ability  to  enter  upon  a  new  war,  when,  too,  the  situation  of  Spain  is  alto- 
gether unlike  that  of  the  United  States  and  England,  whose  credit,  resting 
upon  a  solid  basis,  enables  them  to  supply,  by  loans,  any  deficit  in  their 
income  ? 

Notwithstanding  the  diversity  of  sentiment  which  has  been  displayed 
during  the  debate,  I  am  happy  to  find  that,  with  one  exception,  every 
member  has  done  justice  to  the  struggle  in  the  South,  and  admitted  it  to 
be  entitled  to  the  favor  of  the  best  feelings  of  the  human  heart.  Even 
my  honorable  friend  near  me  (Mr.  Nelson)  has  made  a  speech  on  our  side, 
and  we  should  not  have  found  out,  if  he  had  not  told  us,  that  he  would 
vote  against  us.  Although  his  speech  has  been  distinguished  by  his  ac- 
customed eloquence,  I  should  be  glad  to  agree  on  a  cartel  with  the  gen- 
tlemen on  the  other  side  of  the  House,  to  give  them  his  speech  for  his 
vote.  The  gentleman  says  his  heart  is  with  us,  that  he  ardently  desires  the 
independence  of  the  South.  Will  he  excuse  me  for  telling  him,  that  if  he 
will  give  himself  up  to  the  honest  feelings  of  his  heart,  he  will  have  a  much 
surer  guide  than  by  trusting  to  his  head,  to  which,  however,  I  am  far  from 
offering  any  disparagement  ? 

But,  sir,  it  seems  that  a  division  of  the  republican  party  is  about  to  bo 
made  by  the  proposition.  Who  is  to  furnish,  in  this  respect,  the  correct 
criterion — whose  conduct  to  be  the  standard  of  orthodoxy  ?  What  has 
been  the  great  principle  of  the  party  to  which  the  gentleman  from  Vir- 
ginia refers,  from  the  first  existence  of  the  government  to  the  present  day  ? 
An  attachment  to  liberty,  a  devotion  to  the  great  cause  of  humanity,  of 
freedom,  of  self-government,  and  of  equal  rights.  If  there  is  to  be  a 
division,  as  the  gentleman  says ;  if  he  is  going  to  leave  us,  who  are  follow- 
ing the  old  track,  he  may,  in  his  new  connections,  find  a  great  variety  of 
company,  which,  perhaps,  may  indemnify  him  for  the   loss  of  his   old 


166  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY    CLAY. 

friends.  What  is  the  great  principle  that  has  distinguished  parties  in  all 
ao-es,  and  under  all  governments — democrats  and  federalists,  whigs  and 
tories,  plebeians  and  patricians  1  The  one,  distrustful  of  human  nature, 
appreciates  less  the  influence  of  reason  and  of  good  dispositions,  and  ap- 
peals more  to  physical  force  ;  the  other  party,  confiding  in  human  nature, 
relies  much  upon  moral  power,  and  applies  to  force  as  an  auxiliary  only  to 
the  operations  of  reason.  All  the  modifications  and  denominations  of 
political  parties  and  sects  may  be  traced  to  this  fundamental  distinction. 
It  is  that  which  separated  the  two  great  parties  in  this  country.  If  there 
is  to  be  a  division  in  the  republican  party,  I  glory  that  I,  at  least,  am 
found  among  those  who  are  anxious  for  the  advancement  of  human  rights 
and  of  human  liberty  ;  and  the  honorable  gentleman  who  spoke  of  appeal- 
ing to  the  public  sentiment,  will  find,  when  he  does  so,  or  I  am  much  mis- 
taken, that  public  sentiment  is  also  on  the  side  of  public  liberty  and  of 
human  happiness. 

But  the  gentleman  from  South  Carolina  has  told  us,  that  the  Constitu- 
tion has  wisely  confided  to  the  executive  branch  of  the  government,  the 
administration  of  the  foreign  interests  of  the  country.  Has  the  honorable 
gentleman  attempted  to  show,  though  his  proposition  be  generally  true, 
and  will  never  be  controverted  by  me,  that  we  also  have  not  our  participa- 
tion in  the  administration  of  the  foreign  concerns  of  the  country,  when  we 
are  called  upon,  in  our  legislative  capacity,  to  defray  the  expenses  of  for- 
eign missions,  or  to  regulate  commerce  ?  I  stated,  when  up  before,  and  I 
have  listened  in  vain  for  an  answer  to  the  argument,  that  no  part  of  the 
Constitution  says  which  shall  have  the  precedence,  the  act  of  making  the 
appropriation  for  paying  a  minister,  or  of  sending  one.  I  have  contended 
and  now  repeat,  that  either  the  acts  of  deputing  or  paying  a  minister 
should  be  simultaneous,  or,  if  either  has  the  preference,  the  act  of  appro- 
priating his  pay  should  precede  the  sending  of  a  minister.  I  challenge 
gentlemen  to  show  me  any  thing  in  the  Constitution  which  directs  that  a 
minister  shall  be  sent  before  his  payment  is  provided  for.  I  repeat,  what 
I  said  the  other  day,  that,  by  sending  a  minister  abroad,  during  the  recess, 
to  nations  between  whom  and  us  no  such  relations  existed  as  to  justify  in- 
curring the  expense,  the  legislative  opinion  is  forestalled,  or  unduly  biased. 
I  appeal  to  the  practice  of  the  government,  and  refer  to  various  acts  of 
Congress  for  cases  of  appropriations,  without  the  previous  deputation  of  the 
agent  abroad,  and  without  the  preliminary  of  a  message  from  the  president, 
asking  for  them. 

[Here  Mr.  Clay  cited  a  case  where  Congress  led  the  way  and  the  president 
followed.] 

From  these  it  appears  that  Congress  has  constantly  pursued  the  great 
principle  of  the  theory  of  the  Constitution,  for  which  I  now  contend  — 
that  each  department  of  the  government  must  act  within  its  own  sphere, 


EMANCIPATION   OF    SOUTH    AMERICA.  167 

independently,  and  on  its  own  responsibility.     It  is  a  little  extraordinary, 
indeed,  after  the  doctrine  which  was  maintained  the  other  day,  of  a  sweep- 
ing right  in  Congress  to  appropriate  money  to  any  object,  that  it  should 
now  be  contended  that  Congress  has  no  right  to  appropriate  money  to  a 
particular  object.     The  gentleman's   (Mr.   Lowndes's)   doctrine  is  broad, 
comprehending  every  case ;  but,  when  proposed  to  be  exemplified  in  any 
specific  case,  it  does  not  apply.     My  theory  of  the  Constitution  on  this  par- 
ticular subject,  is,  that  Congress  has  the  right  of  appropriating  money  for 
foreign  missions,  the  president  the  power  to  use  it.     The  president  having 
the  power,  I  am  willing  to  say  to  him,  "  Here  is  the  money,  which  we  alone 
have  a  right  to  appropriate,  which  will  enable  you  to  carry  your  power 
into  effect,  if  it  seems  expedient  to  you."     Both  being  before  him,  the 
power  and  the  means  of  executing  it,  the  president  would  judge,  on  bis  own 
responsibility,  whether  or  not  it  was  expedient  to  exercise  it.    In  this  course, 
each  department  of  the  government  would  act  independently,  without  in- 
fluence from,  and  without  interference  with,  the  other.    I  have  stated  cases, 
from  the  statute-book,  to  show,  that,  in  instances  where  no  foreign  agent  has 
been  appointed,  but  only  a  possibility  of  their  being  appointed,  appropriations 
have  been  made  for  paying  them.    Even  in  the  case  of  tbe  subject-matter  of 
negotiation  (a  right  much  more    important  than  that  of  sending  an  agent), 
an  appropriation  of  money  has  preceded  the  negotiation  of  a  treaty — thus, 
in  the  third  volume  of  the  new  edition  of  the  laws,  page  twenty-seven,  is  a 
case  of  an  appropriation  of  twenty-five  thousand  eight  hundred  and  eighty 
dollars  to  defray  the  expense  of  such  treaties  as  the  President  of  the  United 
States  might  deem  proper  to  make  with  certain  Indian  tribes.    An  act,  which 
has  been  lately  referred  to,  appropriating  two  millions  for  the  purchase  of 
Florida,  is  a  case  still  more  strongly  in  point,  as  contemplating  a  treaty  not 
with  a  savage,  but  with  a  civilized  power.     In  this  case  there  may  have 
been,  though  I  believe  there  was  not,  an  executive  message,  recommend- 
ing the  appropriation  ;  but  I  take  upon  myself  to  assert,  that,  in  almost  all 
the  cases  I  have  quoted,  there  was  no  previous  executive  intimation  that  the 
appropriation  of  the  money  was  necessary  to  the  object ;  but  Congress  has 
taken  up  the  subject,  and  authorized  these  appropriations,  without  any  offi- 
cial call  from  the  executive  to  do  so. 

With  regard  to  the  general  condition  of  the  provinces  now  in  revolt 
against  the  parent  country,  I  will  not  take  up  much  of  the  time  of  the 
House.  Gentlemen  are,  however,  much  mistaken  as  to  many  of  the  points 
of  their  history,  geography,  commerce,  and  produce,  which  have  been 
touched  upon.  Gentlemen  have  supposed  there  would  be  from  those  coun- 
tries a  considerable  competition  of  the  same  products  which  we  export.  I 
venture  to  say,  that,  in  regard  to  Mexico,  there  can  be  no  such  competi- 
tion ;  that  the  table-lands  are  at  such  a  distance  from  the  sea-shore,  and  the 
difficulty  of  reaching  it  is  so  great,  as  to  make  the  transportation  to  La 
Vera  Cruz  too  expensive  to  be  borne,  and  the  heat  so  intense  as  to  destroy 
the  bread-stuffs  as  soon  as  they  arrive.     With  respect  to  New  Granada, 


168  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

the  gentleman  from  Maryland  is  entirely  mistaken.     It  is  the  elevation  of 
Mexico,  principally,  which  enables  it  to  produce  bread-stuff's ;  but  New 
Granada,  lying  nearly  under  the  line,  can  not  produce  them.     The  produc- 
tions of  New  Granada  for  exportation,  are  the  precious  metals  (of  which,  of 
gold,  particularly,  a  greater  portion  is  to  be  found  there  than  in  any  of  the 
provinces,  except  Mexico),  sugar,  coffee,  cocoa,  and  some  other  articles  of 
a  similar  character.     Of  Venezuela,  the  principal  productions  are  coffee,  co- 
coa, indigo,  and  some  sugar.     Sugar  is  also  produced  in  all  the  Guianas — « 
French,  Spanish,  and  Dutch.     The  interior  of  the  provinces  of  La  Plata 
may  be  productive  of  bread-stuffs,  but  they  are  too  remote  to  come  into 
competition  with  us  in  the  West  India  market,  the  voyages  to  the  United 
States  generally  occupying  from  fifty  to  sixty  days,  and  sometimes  as  long 
as  ninety  days.     By  deducting  from  that  number  the  average  passage  from 
the  United  States  to  the  West  Indies,  the  length  of  the  usual  passage  be- 
tween Buenos  Ayres  and  the  West  Indies,  will  be  found,  and  will  show  that, 
in  the  supply  of  the  West  India  market  with  bread-stuffs,  the  provinces  can 
never  come  seriously  into  competition  with  us.     And  in  regard  to  Chili, 
productive  as  it  may  be,  does  the  gentleman  from  Maryland  suppose  that 
vessels  are  going  to  double  Cape  Horn  and  come  into  competition  with  us 
in  the  West  Indies  ?    It  is  impossible. 

But  I  feel  a  reluctance  at  pursuing  the  discussion  of  this  part  of  the 
question,  because  I  am  sure  these  are  considerations  on  which  the  House 
can  not  act,  being  entirely  unworthy  of  the  subject.     We  may  as  well  stop 
all  our  intercourse  with  England,  with  France,  or  with   the  Baltic,  whose 
products  are,  in  many  respects,  the  same  as  ours,  as  to  act  on  the  present 
occasion  under  the  influence  of  any  such  considerations.     It  is  too  selfish, 
too  mean  a  principle  for  this  body  to  act  on,  to  refuse  its  sympathy  for  the 
patriots  of  the  South  because  some  little  advantage  of  a  commercial  na- 
ture may  be  retained  to  us  from  their  remaining  in  their  present  condition, 
which,  however,  I  totally  deny.     Three  fourths  of  the  productions  of  the 
Spanish  provinces  are  the  precious  metals,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  res- 
idue not  of  the  same  character  as  the  staple  productions  of  our  soil.     But 
it  seems  that  a  pamphlet  has  recently  been  published  on  this  subject  to 
which  gentlemen  have  referred.     Now  permit  me  to  express  a  distrust  of 
all  pamphlets  of  this  kind    unless   we  know  their  source.     It  may,  for 
aught  I  know,  if  not  composed  at  the  instance   of  the   Spanish  minister, 
have  been  written  by  some  merchant  who  has  a  privilege  of  trading  to 
Lima  under  royal  license  ;  for  such  do  exist,  as  I  am  informed,  and  some 
of  them  procured  under  the  agency  of  a  celebrated  person  by  the  name  of 
Sarmiento,  of  whom,  perhaps,  the  gentleman  from  Maryland  (Mr.  Smith) 
can  give  the  House  some  information.  To  gentlemen  thus  privileged  to  trade 
with  the  Spanish  provinces,  under  royal  authority,  the  effect  of  a  recogni- 
tion of  the  independence  of  the  provinces  would  be  to  deprive  them  of  that 
monopoly.     The  reputed  author  of  the  pamphlet  in  question,  if  I  under- 
stand correctly,  is  one  who  has  been,  if  he  is  not  now,  deeply  engaged  in 


EMANCIPATION   OF   SOUTH   AMERICA.  169 

the  trade,  and  I  will  venture  to  say  that  many  of  his  statements  are  in- 
correct. In  relation  to  the  trade  of  Mexico,  I  happen  to  possess  the 
Royal  Gazette  of  Mexico  of  1804,  showing  what  was  the  trade  of  that 
province  in  1803  ;  from  which  it  appears  that,  without  making  allowance 
for  the  trade  from  the  Philippine  Islands  to  Acapulco,  the  imports  into  the 
port  of  Vera  Cruz  were,  in  that  year,  twenty-two  millions  in  value,  exclu- 
sive of  contraband,  the  amount  of  which  was  very  considerable.  Among 
those  articles  were  many  which  the  United  States  could  supply  as  well,  if 
not  on  better  terms,  than  they  could  be  supplied  from  any  other  quarter ; 
for  example,  brandy  and  spirits,  paper,  iron,  implements  for  agriculture  and 
the  mines;  wax,  spices,  naval  stores,  salt  fish,  butter,  provisions;  these 
articles  amounting,  in  the  whole,  to  one  seventh  part  of  the  whole  import 
trade  to  Mexico.  With  regard  to  the  independence  of  that  country,  which 
gentlemen  seem  to  think  improbable,  I  rejoice  that  I  am  able  to  congratu- 
late the  House  that  we  have,  this  morning,  intelligence  that  Mina  yet  lives, 
and  the  patriot  flag  is  still  unfurled,  and  the  cause  infinitely  more  pros- 
perous than  ever.  This  intelligence  I  am  in  hopes  will  prove  true,  not- 
withstanding the  particular  accounts  of  his  death  which,  as  there  is  so 
much  of  fabrication  and  falsehood  in  the  Spanish  practice,  are  not  entitled 
to  credit,  unless  corroborated  by  other  information.  Articles  are  manufac- 
tured in  one  province  to  produce  effect  on  other  provinces,  and  in  this 
country ;  and  I  am,  therefore,  disposed  to  think  that  the  details  respecting 
the  capture  and  execution  of  Mina  are  too  minute  to  be  true,  and  were 
made  up  to  produce  an  effect  here. 

With  regard  to  the  general  value  of  the  trade  of  a  country,  it  is  to  be 
determined  by  the  quantum  of  its  population,  and  its  character,  its  produc- 
tions, and  the  extent  and  character  of  the  territory ;  and,  applying  these 
criteria  to  Spanish  America,  no  nation  offers  higher  inducements  to  com- 
mercial enterprise.  Washed  on  the  one  side  by  the  Pacific,  on  the  other  by 
the  south  Atlantic ;  standing  between  Africa  and  Europe  on  the  one  hand, 
and  Asia  on  the  other  ;  lying  alongside  of  the  United  States  ;  her  com- 
merce must,  when  free  from  the  restraints  of  despotism,  be  immensely  im- 
portant ;  particularly  when  it  is  recollected  how  great  a  proportion  of  the 
precious  metals  it  produces;  for  that  nation  which  can  command  the 
precious  metals,  may  be  said  to  command  almost  the  resources  of  the 
world.  For  one  moment,  imagine  the  mines  of  the  South  locked  up  from 
Great  Britain  for  two  years,  what  would  be  the  effect  on  her  paper  system  ? 
Bankruptcy,  explosion,  revolution.  Even  if  the  supply  which  we  get 
abroad  of  the  precious  metals  was  cut  off  for  any  length  of  time,  I  ask  if 
the  effect  on  our  paper  system  would  not  be,  not  perhaps  equally  as  fatal 
as  to  England,  yet  one  of  the  greatest  calamities  which  could  befall 
this  country?  The  revenue  of  Spain,  in  Mexico  alone,  was,  in  1809, 
twenty  millions  of  dollars,  and  in  the  other  provinces  in  about  the  same 
proportion,  taking  into  view  their  population,  independent  of  the  immense 
contributions  annually  paid  to  the  clergy.     When  you  look  at  the  re- 


170  SPEECHES   OF    HENKY    CLAY. 

sources  of  the  country,  and  the  extent  of  its  population,  recollecting  that  it 
is  double  our  owa ;  that  its  consumption  of  foreign  articles,  under  a  free 
commerce,  would  be  proportion  ably  great ;  that  it  yields  a  large  revenue 
under  the  most  abominable  system,  under  which  nearly  three  fourths  of  the 
population  are  unclad,  and  almost  naked  as  from  the  hands  of  nature,  be- 
cause absolutely  deprived  of  the  means  of  clothing  themselves,  what  may 
not  be  the  condition  of  this  country  under  the  operation  of  a  different  sys- 
tem, which  would  let  industry  develop  its  resources  in  all  possible  forms  ? 
Such  a  neighbor  can  not  but  be  a  valuable  acquisition  in  a  commercial 
point  of  view. 

Gentlemen  have  denied  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  the  independence 
of  Buenos  Ayres  at  as  early  a  date  as  I  have  assigned  to  it.  The 
gentleman  from  South  Carolina,  who  is  well  informed  on  the  subject,  has 
not,  I  think,  exhibited  his  usual  candor  ou  this  part  of  it.  When  the  gen- 
tleman talked  of  the  upper  provinces  being  out  of  the  possession  of  the 
patriots  as  late  as  1815,  he  ought  to  have  gone  back  and  told  the  House 
what  was  the  actual  state  of  the  fact,  with  which  I  am  sure  the  gentlemau 
is  very  well  acquainted.  In  1811,  the  government  of  Buenos  Ayres  had 
been  in  possession  of  every  foot  of  the  territory  of  the  vice-royalty.  The 
war  has  been  raging  from  1811  to  1814  in  those  interior  provinces  bor- 
dering on  Lima,  which  have  been  as  often  as  three  times  conquered  by  the 
enemy,  and  as  often  recovered,  and  from  which  the  enemy  is  now  finally 
expelled.  Is  this  at  all  remarkable  during  the  progress  of  such  a  revolu- 
tion ?  During  the  different  periods  of  our  war  of  independence,  the  British 
had  possession  of  different  parts  of  our  country  ;  as  late  as  1780,  the 
whole  of  the  southern  States  were  in  their  possession ;  and  at  an  earlier 
date  they  had  possession  of  the  great  northern  capitals.  There  is,  in  re- 
gard to  Buenos  Ayres,  a  distinguishing  trait  which  does  not  exist  in  the 
history  of  our  Revolution.  That  is,  that  from  1810  to  the  present  day,  the 
capital  of  the  republic  of  La  Plata  has  been  invariably  in  the  possession  of 
the  patriot  government.  Gentlemen  must  admit  that  when,  in  1814,  she 
captured  at  Montevideo  an  army  as  large  as  Burgoyne's  captured  at  Sara- 
toga, they  were  then  in  possession  of  independence.  If  they  have  been  since 
1810  in  the  enjoyment  of  self-government,  it  is,  indeed,  not  very  material  un- 
der what  name  or  under  what  form.  The  fact  of  their  independence  is  all 
that  is  necessary  to  be  established.  Iu  reply  to  the  argument  of  the  gentle- 
mau from  South  Carolina,  derived  from  his  having  been  unable  to  find  out  the 
number  of  the  provinces,  this  arose  from  the  circumstance  that,  thirty-six 
years  ago,  the  vice-royalty  had  been  a  captain-generalship  ;  that  it  ex- 
tended then  only  to  Tucuman,  while  of  late  and  at  present  the  government 
extends  to  Desaguedera,  in  about  the  sixteenth  degree  of  south  latitude. 
There  are  other  reasons  why  there  is  some  confusion  in  the  number  of 
the  provinces,  as  stated  by  different  writers ;  there  is,  in  the  first  place,  a 
territorial  division  of  the  country  ;  then  a  judicial ;  and  next  a  military 
division ;  and  the  provinces  have  been  stated  at  ten,  thirteen,  or  twenty, 


EMANCIPATION   OF    SOUTH    AMEEICA.  171 

according  to  the  denominations  used.  This,  however,  with  the  gentleman 
from  South  Carolina,  I  regard  as  a  fact  of  no  sort  of  consequence. 

I  will  pass  over  the  report  lately  made  to  the  House  by  the  Department 
of  State,  respecting  the  state  of  South  America,  with  only  one  remark — 
that  it  appears  to  me  to  exhibit  evidence  of  an  adroit  and  experienced 
diplomatist,  negotiating,  or  rather  conferring  on  a  subject  with  a  young 
and  inexperienced  minister,  from  a  young  and  inexperienced  republic. 
From  the  manner  in  which  this  report  was  communicated,  after  a  call  for 
information  so  long  made,  and  after  a  lapse  of  two  months  from  the  last 
date  in  the  correspondence  on  the  subject,  I  was  mortified  at  hearing  the 
report  read.  Why  talk  of  the  mode  of  recognition  ?  Why  make  objec- 
tions to  the  form  of  the  commission  ?  If  the  minister  has  not  a  formal 
power,  why  not  tell  him  to  send  back  for  one  ?  Why  ask  of  him  to 
enumerate  the  particular  States  whose  independence  he  wished  acknowl- 
edged ?  Suppose  the  French  minister  had  asked  of  Franklin  what  num- 
ber of  States  he  represented  ?  Thirteen,  if  you  please,  Franklin  would 
have  replied.  But  Mr.  Franklin,  will  you  tell  me  if  Pennsylvania,  whose 
capital  is  in  possession  of  the  British,  be  one  of  them  ?  What  would  Dr. 
Franklin  have  said  ?  It  would  have  comported  better  with  the  frankness 
of  the  American  character,  and  of  American  diplomacy,  if  the  secretary, 
avoiding  cavils  about  the  form  of  the  commission,  had  said  to  the  minister 
of  Buenos  Ayres,  "  at  the  present  moment  we  do  not  intend  to  recognize 
you,  or  to  receive  or  to  send  a  minister  to  you." 

But  among  the  charges  which  gentlemen  have  industriously  brought 
together,  the  House  has  been  told  of  factions  prevailing  in  Buenos  Ayres. 
Do  not  factions  exist  everywhere  ?  Are  they  not  to  be  found  in  the  best 
regulated  and  most  firmly  established  governments  ?  Respecting  the  Car- 
reras,  public  information  is  abused  ;  they  were  supposed  to  have  had  im- 
proper views,  designs  hostile  to  the  existing  government,  and  it  became 
necessary  to  deprive  them  of  the  power  of  doing  mischief.  And  what  is 
the  fact  respecting  the  alleged  arrest  of  American  citizens  ?  Buenos  Ayres 
has  been  organizing  an  army  to  attack  Chili.  Carrera  arrives  at  the  river 
La  Plata  with  some  North  Americans  ;  he  had  before  defeated  the  revolu- 
tion in  Chili,  by  withholding  his  co-operation  ;  the  government  of  Buenos 
Ayres  therefore  said  to  him,  We  do  not  want  your  resources  ;  our  own 
army  is  operating  ;  if  you  carry  yours  there,  it  may  produce  dissension,  and 
cause  the  loss  of  liberty ;  you  shall  not  go.  On  his  opposing  this  course, 
what  was  done  which  has  called  forth  the  sympathy  of  gentlemen  ?  He 
and  those  who  attended  him  from  this  country  were  put  in  confinement, 
but  only  long  enough  to  permit  the  operations  of  the  Buenos  Ayrean 
army  to  go  on  ;  they  were  then  permitted  to  go,  or  made  their  escape  to 
Montevideo,  and  afterward  where  they  pleased.  With  respect  to  the  con- 
duct of  that  government,  only  recall  the  attention  of  gentlemen  to  the  orders 
which  have  lately  emanated  from  it,  for  the  regulation  of  privateers,  which 
has  displayed  a  solicitude  to  guard  against  irregularity,  and  to  respect  the 


172  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

rights  of  neutrals,  not  inferior  to  that  ever  shown  by  any  government,  which 
has  on  any  occasion  attempted  to  regulate  this  licentious  mode  of  warfare. 

The  honorable  gentleman  from  Georgia  commenced  his  remarks  the 
other  day  by  an  animadversion  which  he  might  well  have  spared,  when  he 
told  us,  that  even  the  prayers  of  the  chaplain  of  this  House  had  been 
offered  up  in  behalf  of  the  patriots.  And  was  it  reprehensible,  that  an 
American  chaplain,  whose  cheeks  are  furrowed  by  age,  and  his  head  as 
white  as  snow,  who  has  a  thousand  times,  during  our  own  Revolution,  im- 
plored the  smiles  of  heaven  on  our  exertions,  should  indulge  in  the  pious 
and  patriotic  feelings  flowing  from  his  recollections  of  our  own  Revolu- 
tion ?  Ought  he  to  be  subject  to  animadversion  for  so  doing  in  a  place 
where  he  can  not  be  heard  ?  Ought  he  to  be  subject  to  animadversion  for 
soliciting  the  favor  of  heaven  on  the  same  cause  as  that  in  which  we  fought 
the  good  fight,  and  conquered  our  independence  ?     I  trust  not. 

But  the  gentleman  from  Georgia,  it  appears,  can  see  no  parallel  between 
our  Revolution  and  that  of  the  Spanish  provinces.  Their  revolution,  in  its 
commencement,  did  not  aim  at  complete  independence,  neither  did  ours. 
Such  is  the  loyalty  of  the  Creole  character,  that  although  groaning  under 
three  hundred  years  of  tyranny  and  oppression,  they  have  been  unwilling 
to  cast  off  their  allegiance  to  that  throne,  which  has  been  the  throne  of 
their  ancestors.  But,  looking  forward  to  a  redress  of  wrongs,  rather  than 
a  change  of  government,  they  gradually,  and  perhaps  at  first  unintention- 
ally, entered  into  a  revolution.  I  have  it  from  those  who  have  been  actively 
engaged  in  our  Revolution,  from  that  venerable  man  (Chancellor  Wythe), 
whose  memory  I  shall  ever  cherish  with  filial  regard,  that,  a  very  short 
time  before  our  Declaration  of  Independence,  it  would  have  been  impossible 
to  have  got  a  majority  of  Congress  to  declare  it.  Look  at  the  language 
of  our  petitious  of  that  day,  carrying  our  loyalty  to  the  foot  of  the 
throne,  and  avowing  our  anxiety  to  remain  under  the  crown  of  our 
ancestors;  independence  was  then  not  even  remotely  suggested  as  our 
object. 

The  present  state  of  facts,  and  not  what  has  passed  and  gone  in  South 
America,  must  be  consulted.  At  the  present  moment,  the  patriots  of  the 
South  are  fighting  for  liberty  and  independence  ;  for  precisely  what  we 
fought.  But  their  revolution,  the  gentleman  told  the  House,  was  stained 
by  scenes  which  had  not  occurred  in  ours.  If  so,  it  was  because  execrable 
outrages  had  been  committed  upon  them  by  troops  of  the  mother  country, 
which  were  not  upon  us.  Can  it  be  believed,  if  the  slaves  had  been  let 
loose  upon  us  in  the  South,  as  they  have  been  let  loose  in  Venezuela  ;  if 
quarter  had  been  refused  ;  capitulations  violated  ;  that  General  Washing 
ton,  at  the  head  of  the  armies  of  the  United  States,  would  not  have  re- 
sorted to  retribution  ?  Retaliation  is  sometimes  mercy,  mercy  to  both 
parties.  The  only  means  by  which  the  coward's  soul  that  indulges  in 
such  enormities  can  be  reached,  is  to  show  to  him  that  they  will  be  visited 
by  severe  but  just  retribution.     There  are  traits  iu  the  history  of  this  rev- 


EMANCIPATION   OF   SOUTH   AMERICA.  173 

olution,  which  show  what  deep  root  liberty  has  taken  in  South  America. 
I  will  state  an  instance.  The  only  hope  of  a  wealthy  and  reputable  family 
was  charged,  at  the  head  of  a  small  force,  with  the  care  of  the  magazine 
of  the  army.  He  saw  that  it  was  impossible  to  defend  it.  "  Go,"  said  he 
to  his  companions  in  arms,  "  I  alone  am  sufficient  for  its  defense."  The  as- 
sailants approached  ;  he  applied  a  match  and  blew  up  the  magazine,  with 
himself,  scattering  death  and  destruction  on  his  enemy.  There  is  another 
instance  of  tbe  intrepidity  of  a  female  of  tbe  patriot  party.  A  lady  in  New 
Granada  had  given  information  to  the  patriot  forces,  of  plans  and  instruc- 
tions by  which  the  capital  might  be  invaded.  She  was  put  upon  the  rack 
to  divulge  her  accomplices.  She  bore  the  torture  with  the  greatest  forti- 
tude, and  died  exclaiming,  "  You  shall  not  hear  it  from  my  mouth  ;  I  will 
die,  and  may  those  live  who  can  free  my  country." 

But  the  House  has  been  asked,  and  asked  with  a  triumph  worthy  of  a 
better  cause,  why  recognize  this  republic  ?  Where  is  the  use  of  it  ?  And 
is  it  possible  that  gentlemen  can  see  no  use  in  recognizing  this  republic  ? 
For  what  did  this  republic  fight  ?  To  be  admitted  into  the  family  of  na- 
tions. Tell  the  nations  of  the  world,  says  Pucyrredon,  in  his  speech,  that 
we  already  belong  to  their  illustrious  rank.  What  would  be  the  powerful 
consequences  of  a  recognition  of  their  claim  ?  I  ask  my  honorable  friend 
before  me  (General  Bloomfield),  the  highest  sanction  of  whose  judgment 
in  favor  of  my  proposition,  I  fondly  anticipate,  with  what  anxious  solicitude, 
during  our  Revolution,  he  and  his  glorious  compatriots  turned  their  eyes  to 
Europe  and  asked  to  be  recognized — I  ask  him,  the  patriot  of  '76,  how  the 
heart  rebounded  with  joy,  on  the  information  that  France  had  recognized 
us  ?  The  moral  influence  of  such  a  recognition,  on  the  patriot  of  the 
South,  will  be  irresistible.  He  will  derive  assurance  from  it,  of  his  not 
having  fought  in  vain.  In  the  constitution  of  our  natures  there  is  a  point,  to 
which  adversity  may  pursue  us,  without  perhaps  any  worse  effect  than  that 
of  exciting  new  energy  to  meet  it.  Having  reached  that  point,  if  no  gleam  of 
comfort  breaks  through  the  gloom,  we  sink  beneath  the  pressure,  yielding 
reluctantly  to  our  fate,  and  in  hopeless  despair  lose  all  stimulus  to  exertion. 
And  is  there  not  reason  to  fear  such  a  fate  to  the  patriots  of  La  Plata  ? 
Already  enjoying  independence  for  eight  years,  their  ministers  are  yet 
spurned  from  the  courts  of  Europe,  and  rejected  by  the  government  of  a 
sister  republic.  Contrast  this  conduct  of  ours  with  our  conduct  in  other 
respects.  No  matter  whence  the  minister  comes,  be  it  from  a  despotic 
power,  we  receive  him  ;  and  even  now,  the  gentleman  from  Maryland, 
(Mr.  Smith)  would  have  us  send  a  minister  to  Constantinople,  to  beg  a 
passage  through  the  Dardanelles  to  the  Black  Sea,  that  I  suppose,  we 
might  get  some  hemp  and  bread-stuffs  there,  of  which  we  ourselves  produce 
none — he,  who  can  see  no  advantage  to  the  country  from  opening  to  its 
commerce  the  measureless  resources  of  South  America,  would  sent  a  min- 
ister to  Constantinople  for  a  little  trade.  Nay,  I  have  seen  a  project  in 
the  newspapers,  and  I  should  not  be  surprised,  after  what  we  have  already 


174  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY    CLAY. 

seen,  at  its  being  carried  into  effect,  for  sending  a  minister  to  the  Porte. 
Yes,  sir,  from  Constantinople,  or  from  the  Brazils ;  from  Turk  or  Chris- 
tian ;  from  black  or  white  ;  from  the  dey  of  Algiers  or  the  bey  of  Tunis  ; 
from  the  devil  himself,  if  he  wore  a  crown,  we  should  receive  a  minister. 
We  even  paid  the  expenses  of  the  minister  of  his  sublime  highness,  the 
bey  of  Tunis,  and  thought  ourselves  highly  honored  by  his  visit.  But  let 
the  minister  come  from  a  poor  republic,  like  that  of  La  Plata,  and  we  turn 
our  back  on  him.  The  brilliant  costumes  of  the  ministers  of  the  royal 
governments  are  seen  glistening  in  the  circles  of  our  drawing-rooms,  and 
their  splendid  equipages  rolling  through  the  avenues  of  the  metropolis ; 
but  the  unaccredited  minister  of  the  republic,  if  he  visit  our  President  or 
Secretary  of  State  at  all,  must  do  it  incognito,  less  the  eye  of  Don  Onis 
should  be  offended  by  so  unseemly  a  sight !  I  hope  the  gentleman  from 
South  Carolina,  who  is  so  capable  of  estimating  the  effect  of  moral  causes, 
will  see  some  use  in  recognizing  the  independence  of  La  Plata.  I  appeal 
to  the  powerful  effect  of  moral  causes,  manifested  in  the  case  of  the  French 
Revolution,  when  by  their  influence,  that  nation  swept  from  about  her 
the  armies  of  the  combined  powers,  by  which  she  was  environed,  and  rose 
up,  the  colossal  power  of  Europe.  There  is  an  example  of  the  effect  of 
moral  power.  All  the  patriots  ask,  all  they  want  at  our  hands,  is,  to  be 
recognized  as,  what  they  have  been  for  the  last  eight  years,  an  independent 
power. 

But,  it  seems,  we  dare  not  do  this,  lest  we  tread  on  sacred  ground  ;  and 
a  honorable  gentleman  from  Virginia  (Mr.  Smyth),  who,  when  he  has 
been  a  little  longer  in  this  House,  will  learn  to  respect  its  powers,  calls  it 
an  usurpation  on  the  part  of  this  House.  Has  the  gentleman  weighed  the 
terms  which  he  employed  ?  If  I  mistake  not,  the  gentleman,  in  the  de- 
bate respecting  the  power  to  make  internal  improvements,  called  that  too 
a  usurpation  on  the  part  of  this  House.  That  power,  too,  however,  he 
admitted  to  belong  to  the  executive,  and  traced  it  to  an  imperial  source, 
informing  us  that  Caesar  or  somebody  else,  had  exercised  it.  Sir,  the  gen- 
tleman has  mistaken  his  position  here;  he  is  a  military  chieftain,  and  an 
admirable  defender  of  executive  authority,  but  he  has  yet  to  learn  his  horn- 
book as  to  the  powers  of  this  branch  of  the  Legislature.  Usurpation  is  ar- 
rogating to  yourself  authority  which  is  vested  elsewhere.  But  what  is  it 
that  I  propose,  to  which  this  term  has  been  applied  ?  To  appropriate  mo- 
ney to  pay  a  foreign  minister  his  outfit  and  a  year's  salary.  If  that  be  a 
usurpation,  we  have  been  usurping  power  from  the  commencement  of  the 
government  to  the  present  time.  The  chairman  of  the  committee  of  ways 
and  means  has  never  reported  an  appropriation  bill  without  some  instance 
of  this  usurpation. 

There  are  three  modes  under  our  Constitution,  in  which  a  nation  may  be 
recognized  :  by  the  executive  receiving  a  minister ;  secondly,  by  its  sending 
one  thither ;  and,  thirdly,  this  House  unquestionably  has  the  right  to  rec- 
ognize, in  the  exercise  of  the  constitutional  power  of  Congress  to  regulate 


EMANCIPATION   OF   SOUTH   AMERICA.  175 

foreign  commerce.  To  receive  a  minister  from  a  foreign  power,  is  an  ad- 
mission that  the  party  sending  him  is  sovereign  and  independent.  So  the 
sending  a  minister,  as  ministers  are  never  sent  but  to  sovereign  powers,  is  a 
recognition  of  the  independence  of  the  power  to  whom  the  minister  is  sent. 
Now,  the  honorable  gentleman  from  South  Carolina  would  prefer  the  ex- 
pression of  our  opinion  by  a  resolution,  independent  of  the  appropriation 
bill.  If  the  gentleman  will  vote  for  it  in  that  shape,  I  will  readily  gratify 
him  ;  all  that  I  want  to  do  is,  to  convey  to  the  president  au  expression  of 
our  willingness,  that  the  Government  of  Buenos  Ayres  should  be  recog- 
nized. Whether  it  shall  be  done  by  receiving  a  minister  or  sending  one, 
is  quite  immaterial.  It  is  urged,  that  there  may  be  an  impropriety  in  send- 
ing a  minister,  not  being  certain,  after  what  has  passed,  that  he  will  be  re- 
ceived ;  but  that  is  one  of  the  questions  submitted  to  the  discretion  of  the 
executive,  which  he  will  determine  upon  a  view  of  all  the  circumstances; 
and  who,  of  course,  will  previously  have  an  understanding,  that  our  minis- 
ter will  be  duly  respected.  If  gentlemen  desire  to  know  what  a  minister 
from  us  is  to  do,  I  would  have  him  congratulate  the  republic  on  the  estab- 
lishment of  free  government  and  on  their  liberation  from  the  ancient  dy- 
nasty of  Spain  ;  assure  it  of  the  interest  we  feel  in  its  welfare,  and  of  our 
readiness  to  concur  in  any  arrangement  which  may  be  advantageous  to  our 
mutual  interests.  Have  we  not  a  minister  at  the  Brazils,  a  nation  lying 
alongside  of  the  provinces  of  La  Plata ;  and,  considering  the  number  of 
slaves  in  it,  by  no  means  so  formidable  as  the  latter,  and  about  equi-distant 
from  us.  In  reference  to  the  strength  of  the  two  powers,  that  of  La  Plata 
is  much  stronger,  and  the  government  of  Brazil,  trembling  under  the  ap- 
prehension of  the  effect  of  the  arms  of  La  Plata,  has  gone  further  than  any 
other  power  to  recognize  its  independence,  having  entered  into  a  military 
convention  with  the  republic,  by  which  each  power  guaranties  the  posses- 
sions of  the  other.  And  we  have  exchanged  ministers  with  the  Brazils.  The 
one,  however,  is  a  kingdom,  the  other  a  republic  ;  and  if  any  gentleman 
can  assign  any  other  better  reason  why  a  minister  should  be  sent  to  one 
and  not  to  the  other  of  these  powers,  I  shall  be  glad  to  hear  it  disclosed, 
for  I  have  not  been  able  myself  to  discover  it. 

A  gentleman  yesterday  told  the  House  that  the  news  from  Buenos  Ayres 
was  unfavorable.  Take  it  altogether,  I  believe  it  is  not.  But  I  put  but 
little  trust  in  such  accounts.  In  our  Revolution,  incredulity  of  reports  and 
newspaper  stories,  propagated  by  the  enemy,  was  so  strengthened  by  experi- 
ence, that  at  last,  nothing  was  believed  which  was  not  attested  by  the  sig- 
nature of  "  Charles  Thomson."  I  am  somewhat  similarly  situated ;  I  can 
not  believe  these  reports  ;  I  wish  to  see  "  Charles  Thomson  "  before  I  give 
full  credit  to  them.  The  vessel  which  has  arrived  at  Baltimore — and  by 
the  way,  by  its  valuable  cargo  of  specie,  hides,  and  tallow,  gives  evidence 
of  a  commerce  worth  pursuing — brought  some  rumor  of  a  difference  be- 
tween Artigas  and  the  authorities  of  Buenos  Ayres.  With  respect  to  the 
Banda  Oriental,  which  is  said  to  be  occupied  by  Artigas,  it  constitutes  but 


176  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

a  very  subordinate  part  of  the  territory  of  the  United  Provinces  of  La 
Plata ;  and  it  can  be  no  more  objection  to  recognizing  the  nation,  because 
that  province  is  not  included  within  its  power,  than  it  could  have  been  to 
our  recognition,  because  several  States  held  out  against  the  adoption  of  the 
Constitution.  Before  I  attach  any  confidence  to  a  letter  not  signed  "  Charles 
Thomson,"  I  must  know  who  the  man  is  who  writes  it,  what  are  bis  sources 
of  information,  bis  character  for  veracity,  and  so  forth,  and  of  all  those  par- 
ticulars, we  are  deprived  of  the  information,  in  the  case  of  the  recent  intel- 
ligence in  the  Baltimore  papers,  as  extracted  from  private  letters. 

But  we  are  charged,  on  the  present  occasion,  with  treading  on  sacred 
ground.  Let  me  suppose,  what  I  do  not  believe  to  be  the  case,  that  the 
president  bas  expressed  an  opinion  one  way  and  we  another.  At  so  early 
a  period  of  our  government,  because  a  particular  individual  fills  the  pres- 
idential chair — an  individual  whom  I  highly  respect,  more  perhaps  than 
some  of  those  wbo  would  be  considered  his  exclusive  friends — is  the  odious 
doctrine  to  be  preached  here,  tbat  the  chief  magistrate  can  do  no  wrong? 
Is  the  doctrine  of  passive  obedience  and  non-resistance,  are  the  principles 
of  the  Stuarts,  to  be  revived  in  this  free  government  ?  Is  an  opinion  to 
be  suppressed  and  scouted,  because  it  is  in  opposition  to  the  opinion  of  the 
president  ?  Sir,  as  long  as  I  have  a  seat  on  this  floor,  I  shall  not  hesitate 
to  exert  the  independence  which  belongs  to  the  representative  character; 
I  shall  not  hesitate  to  express  my  opinions,  coincident  or  not  with  those  of 
the  executive.  But  I  can  show  that  this  cry  has  been  raised  on  the  pres- 
ent occasion  without  reason.  Suppose  a  case — that  the  president  had 
sent  a  minister  to  Buenos  Ayres,  and  this  House  had  been  called  on  to 
make  an  appropriation  for  the  payment  of  his  salary.  I  ask  of  gentlemen, 
whether  in  that  case  they  would  not  have  voted  an  appropriation  ?  And 
has  not  the  House  a  right  to  deliberate  on  the  propriety  of  doing  so,  as 
well  before,  as  after  a  minister  is  sent  ?  Will  gentlemen  please  to  point 
out  the  difference  ?  I  contend  that  we  are  the  true  friends  of  the  execu- 
tive ;  and  that  the  title  does  not  belong  to  those  who  have  taken  it.  We 
wish  to  extend  his  influence,  and  give  him  patronage ;  to  give  him  means, 
as  he  has  now  the  power,  to  send  another  minister  abroad.  But,  apart 
from  this  view  of  the  question,  as  regards  the  executive  power,  this  House 
has  the  incontestable  right  to  recognize  a  foreign  nation  in  the  exercise  of 
its  power  to  regulate  commerce  with  foreign  nations.  Suppose,  for  exam- 
ple, we  pass  an  act  to  regulate  trade  between  the  United  States  and  Buenos 
Ayres,  the  existence  of  the  nation  would  be  thereby  recognized,  as  we  could 
not  regulate  trade  with  a  nation  which  does  not  exist. 

The  gentleman  from  Maryland  (Mr.  Smith)  and  the  gentleman  from 
Virginia  (Mr.  Smyth),  the  great  champions  of  executive  power,  and  the 
opponents  of  legislative  authority,  have  contended  that  recognition  would 
be  cause  of  war.  These  gentlemen  are  reduced  to  this  dilemma.  If  it  is 
cause  of  war,  the  executive  ought  not  to  have  the  right  to  produce  a  war 
upon  the  country,  without  consulting  Congress.     If  it  is  no  cause  of  war, 


EMANCIPATION    OF    SOUTH    AMERICA.  177 

it  is  an  act  which  there  is  no  danger  in  performing.  There  is  very  little 
difference  in  principle,  between  vesting  the  executive  with  the  power  of 
declaring  war,  or  with  the  power  of  necessarily  leading  the  country  into 
war,  without  consulting  the  authority  to  whom  the  power  of  making  war 
is  confided.  But  I  deny  that  it  is  cause  of  war  ;  hut  if  it  is,  the  sense  of 
Congress  ought  certainly  in  some  way  or  other  to  he  taken  on  it,  before 
that  step  is  taken.  I  know  that  some  of  the  most  distinguished  statesmen 
in  the  country  have  taken  the  view  of  this  subject,  that  the  power  to  rec- 
ognize the  independence  of  any  nation  does  not  belong  to  the  president ;  that 
it  is  a  power  too  momentous  and  consequential  in  its  character,  to  belong 
to  the  executive.  My  own  opinion,  I  confess,  is  different,  believing  the 
power  to  belong  to  either  the  president  or  Congress,  and  that  it  may,  as 
most  convenient,  be  exercised  by  either.  If  aid  is  to  be  given  to  afford 
which  will  be  cause  of  war,  however,  Congress  alone  can  give  it. 

This  House,  then,  has  the  power  to  act  on  the  subject,  even  though  the 
president  has  expressed  an  opinion,  which  he  has  not,  further  than,  as  ap- 
pears by  the  report  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  to  decide  that  in  January 
last,  it  would  not  be  proper  to  recognize  them.  But  the  president  stands 
pledged  to  recognize  the  republic,  if  on  the  return  of  the  commissioners 
whom  he  has  deputed,  they  shall  make  report  favorable  to  the  stability  of 
the  government.  Suppose  the  chairman  of  the  committee  of  foreign  re- 
lations had  reported  a  provision  for  an  appropriation  of  that  description 
which  I  propose,  should  we  not  all  have  voted  for  it  ?  And  can  any  gen- 
tleman be  so  pliant,  as,  on  the  mere  ground  of  an  executive  recommend- 
ation, to  vote  an  appropriation  without  exercising  his  own  faculties  on  the 
question ;  and  yet,  when  there  is  no  such  suggestion,  will  not  even  so  far 
act  for  himself  as  to  determine  whether  a  republic  is  so  independent  that 
we  may  fairly  take  the  step  of  recognition  of  it  ?  I  hope  that  no  such 
submission  to  the  executive  pleasure  will  characterize  this  House. 

One  more  remark,  and  I  have  done.  One  gentleman  told  the  House 
that  the  population  of  the  Spanish  provinces  is  eighteen  millions  ;  that  we, 
with  a  population  of  two  millions  only,  conquered  our  independence  ;  and 
that,  if  the  southern  provinces  willed  it,  they  must  be  free.  This  popula- 
tion, I  have  already  stated,  consists  of  distinct  nations,  having  but  little, 
if  any,  intercourse,  the  largest  of  which  is  Mexico ;  and  they  are  so  sep- 
arated by  immense  distances,  that  it  is  impossible  there  should  be  any 
co-operation  between  them.  Besides,  they  have  difficulties  to  encounter 
which  we  had  not.  They  have  a  noblesse ;  they  are  divided  into  jealous 
castes,  and  a  vast  proportion  of  Indians ;  to  which  adding  the  great  in- 
fluence of  the  clergy,  and  it  will  be  seen  how  widely  different  the  circum- 
stances of  Spanish  America  are,  from  those  under  which  the  Revolution  in 
this  country  was  brought  to  a  successful  termination.  I  have  already 
shown  how  deep-rooted  is  the  spirit  of  liberty  in  that  country.  I  have 
instanced  the  little  island  of  Margarita,  against  which  the  whole  force  of 
Spain  has  been  in  vain  directed — containing  a  population  of  only  sixteen 

12 


178  SPEECHES   OF   HENKT   CLAY 

thousand  souls,  but  where  every  man,  woman  and  child,  is  a  Grecian  sol- 
dier, in  defense  of  freedom.  For  many  years  the  spirit  of  freedom  has 
been  struggling  in  Venezuela,  and  Spain  has  been  unable  to  conquer  it. 
Morillo,  in  an  official  dispatch,  transmitted  to  the  minister  of  marine  of 
his  own  country,  avows  that  Angostura,  and  all  Guayana  are  in  possession 
of  the  patriots,  as  well  as  all  that  country  from  which  supplies  can  be 
drawn.  According  to  the  last  accounts,  Bolivar  and  other  patriot  com- 
manders, are  concentrating  their  forces,  and  are  within  one  day's  march  of 
Morillo ;  and  if  they  do  not  forsake  the  Fabian  policy,  which  is  the  true 
course  for  them,  the  result  will  be,  that  even  the  weakest  of  the  whole  of 
the  provinces  of  Spanish  America,  will  establish  their  independence,  and 
secure  the  enjoyment  of  those  rights  and  blessings  which  rightfully  belong 
to  them. 


ON    THE    SEMINOLE    WAR. 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OP  REPRESENTATIVES,  JANUARY,  1819. 

[When  it  is  considered  that  the  following  speech  has  had  more 
influence  on  the  history  and  destiny  of  the  United  States,  than 
any  single  event  since  the  commencement  of  the  nineteenth  cen- 
tury, it  should  be  read,  for  that  cause  alone,  with  profound 
interest  and  attention.  And  how  has  it  had  such  influence  ? 
Simply  because  it  decided  the  question,  whether  Andrew  Jack- 
son or  Henry  Clay  should,  from  that  moment,  rise  to  a  position 
of  control  over  the  counsels  and  policy  of  the  nation,  to  run  on 
for  ages — perhaps  forever.  It  was  a  speech  which  could  never 
be  forgiven  by  General  Jackson,  and  which  may  be  regarded  as 
the  moral  cause  of  his  relative  ascendancy  with  the  American 
people  over  Mr.  Clay.  Other  subsequent  events  fell  into  line 
with  this,  such  as  the  charge  of  bargain  and  corruption  in  the 
election  of  Mr.  Adams,  in  1825,  and  augmented  the  force  of  the 
current ;  but  here,  in  this  speech,  was  the  beginning  of  that 
eternal  enmity  which  General  Jackson  carried  in  his  bosom 
against  Mr.  Clay.  But  Mr.  Clay  could  never  calculate  conse- 
quences to  himself,  when  duty  summoned  him  to  a  field  of 
combat ;  and  the  repeated  disclaimers  found  in  this  speech  of  all 
intention  or  willingness  on  his  part,  to  disparage  General  Jackson's 
military  fame,  or  to  impeach  the  motives  of  his  conduct  in  these 
affairs,  should  be  accepted  as  pledges,  not  that  he  loved  Caesar 
less,  but  Rome  more.  Now  that  the  passions  of  that  hour  have 
subsided,  and  all  concerned  have  passed  from  the  stage  of  life, 
the  verdict  of  a  calm  review  of  that  history  may  safely  be  trusted. 
There  were  political  reasons  at  that  time  for  sustaining  General 
Jackson,  both  with  the  administration  (Mr.  Monroe's)  and  with 
Congress.  Mr.  Monroe,  indeed,  was  mixed  up  in  the  affair,  and 
had  loaned  his  sanction  to  the  general's  course.  Mr.  Calhoun, 
however,  of  the  Cabinet,  is  understood  to  have  disapproved  of 
the  general's  conduct,  and  to  have  taken  strong  ground,  in 
Cabinet  councils,  against  him,  which  fact  was  not  known  to 


180  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

General  Jackson,  until  Mr.  Van  Buren  discolsed  it  to  him 
during  the  first  term  of  his  presidency,  when  Mr.  Calhoun  was 
vice-president,  and  a  candidate  for  the  presidency,  Mr.  Van 
Buren  being  his  rival.  Hence  the  beginning  of  the  feud  between 
General  Jackson  and  Mr.  Calhoun,  which  grew  into  a  hatred 
toward  the  latter,  like  that  which  existed  in  the  general's  mind 
toward  Mr.  Clay,  originating  in  precisely  the  same  cause  ;  and 
hence  General  Jackson's  opposition  to  the  claims  of  Mr.  Calhoun 
to  be  his  successor,  and  his  preference  of  Mr.  Van  Buren.  As 
soon  as  Mr.  Van  Buren  had  whispered  this  secret  in  General 
Jackson's  ear,  the  general  (then  president)  wrote  to  Mr.  Calhoun 
(the  vice-president)  and  demanded  to  know  if  the  facts  were  so  ; 
and  unable  to  deny  it,  Mr.  Calhoun  took  the  ground,  that  no 
one  had  a  right  to  question  him  about  Cabinet  secrets.  Having 
his  adversary  thus  cornered,  General  Jackson  took  Mr.  Van 
Buren's  account  of  the  matter  as  true,  and  acted  accordingly. 
It  was  true.  Mr.  Clay  and  Mr.  Calhoun  were  now  equally  out 
of  favor,  and  equally  hated  ;  and  Mr.  Van  Buren  was  henceforth 
in  the  ascendant  for  the  succession  ;  and  he  did  succeed  :  for 
General  Jackson's  popularity  was  such  that  he  had  only  to  name 
his  successor,  to  secure  his  election.  Mr.  Clay  could  afford  the 
contest,  and  bide  his  time  ;  for  he  had  bottom  to  stand  upon. 
But  fiom  that  hour,  Mr.  Calhoun's  political  fortunes  were  rapidly 
on  the  wane.  From  that  hour,  Mr.  Calhoun  was  always  in  a 
false  position,  and  never  got  right.  He  was  soon  involved  in 
Nullification,  and  General  Jackson  declared  he  would  hang  him  ; 
which,  perhaps,  he  would  have  done,  if  Mr.  Clay  and  his  friends 
had  not  come  to  his  rescue  by  the  Compromise  of  1833. 

The  resolutions  of  censure  on  General  Jackson,  supported  by 
the  following  speech,  and  opposed  by  the  administration,  were 
voted  down,  by  majorities  ranging  from  thirty  to  forty-six,  in  a 
House  of  one  hundred  and  seventy  members.  There  were 
numerous  speeches  on  both  sides,  from  the  ablest  members  of  the 
House,  and  it  was  one  of  the  most  animated  debates  ever  sus- 
tained in  that  body.  Mr.  Clay  spoke  twice,  but  the  other  speech 
was  not  preserved. 

Now  that  the  parties  to  that  question  are  all  gone,  and  since 
the  political  reasons  which  controlled  it  have  ceased  to  operate, 
Mr.  Clay's  speech  can  be  read  without  bias.  It  will  now  be  felt 
that  every  sentence,  and  every  word  of  it,  is  true  and  weighty. 
Such  will  be  the  verdict  of  all  coming  time  ;  and  the  principles 
involved  are  immensely  important.     Nothing  but  a  reluctance  to 


ON   THE   SEMINOLE  WAR.  181 

censure  the  hero  of  New  Orleans  could  have  led  to  such  a  de- 
cision. No  one  can  read  this  speech  without  having  his  sym- 
pathies powerfully  excited,  or  without  feeling  that  patriotism, 
soaring  above  all  personal  considerations,  is  the  highest  and  no- 
blest virtue  of  the  statesman.  Such  a  vindication  of  humanity 
in  war,  and  of  those  principles  of  public  law  which  have  softened 
its  horrors,  composes  one  of  the  brightest  pages  of  American 
history.] 

Mr.  Chairman  :  In  rising-  to  address  you,  sir,  on  the  very  interesting 
subject  which  now  engages  the  attention  of  Congress,  I  must  be  allowed  to 
say,  that  all  inferences  drawn  from  the  course  which  it  will  be  my  painful 
duty  to  take  in  this  discussion,  of  unfriendliness  either  to  the  chief  magis- 
trate of  the  country,  or  to  the  illustrious  military  chieftain  whose  opera- 
tions are  under  investigation,  will  be  wholly  unfounded.  Toward  that 
distinguished  captain,  who  shed  so  much  glory  on  our  country,  whose  re- 
nown constitutes  so  great  a  portion  of  its  moral  property,  I  never  had,  I 
never  can  have,  any  other  feelings  than  those  of  the  most  profound  respect, 
and  of  the  utmost  kindness.  With  him  my  acquaintance  is  very  limited, 
but,  so  far  as  it  has  extended,  it  has  been  of  the  most  amicable  kind.  I 
know  the  motives  which  have  been,  and  which  will  again  be  attributed  to 
me,  in  regard  to  the  other  exalted  personage  alluded  to.  They  have  been 
and  will  be  unfounded.  I  have  no  interest,  other  than  that  of  seeing  the 
concerns  of  my  country  well  and  happily  administered.  It  is  infinitely 
more  gratifying  to  behold  the  prosperity  of  my  country  advancing  by  the 
wisdom  of  the  measures  adopted  to  promote  it,  than  it  would  be  to  expose 
the  errors  which  may  be  committed,  if  there  be  any,  in  the  conduct  of  its 
affairs.  Little  as  has  been  my  experience  in  public  life,  it  has  been  suf- 
ficient to  teach  me  that  the  most  humble  station  is  surrounded  by  difficul- 
ties and  embarrassments.  Rather  than  throw  obstructions  in  the  way  of 
the  president,  I  would  precede  him,  and  pick  out  those,  if  I  could,  which 
might  jostle  him  in  his  progress ;  I  would  sympathize  with  him  in  his  em- 
barrassments, and  commiserate  with  him  in  his  misfortunes.  It  is  true 
that  it  has  been  my  mortification  to  differ  from  that  gentleman  on  several 
occasions.  I  may  be  again  reluctantly  compelled  to  differ  from  him  ;  but 
I  will  with  the  utmost  sincerity,  assure  the  committee,  that  I  have  formed 
no  resolution,  come  under  no  engagements,  and  that  I  never  will  form  any 
resolution,  or  contract  any  engagements,  for  systematic  opposition  to  his 
administration,  or  to  that  of  any  other  chief  magistrate. 

I  beg  leave  further  to  premise,  that  the  subject  under  consideration,  pre- 
sents two  distinct  aspects,  susceptible,  in  my  judgment,  of  the  most  clear 
and  precise  discrimination.  The  one  I  will  call  its  foreign,  the  other  its 
domestic  aspect.  In  regard  to  the  first,  I  will  say,  that  I  approve  entirely 
of  the  conduct  of  our  government,  and  that  Spain  has  no  cause  of  com- 


182  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

plaint.  Having  violated  an  important  stipulation  of  the  treaty  of  1*795, 
that  power  has  justly  subjected  herself  to  all  the  consequences  which  en- 
sued upon  the  entry  into  her  dominions,  and  it  belongs  not  to  her  to  com- 
plain of  those  measures  which  resulted  from  her  breach  of  contract ;  still 
less  has  she  a  rio-ht  to  examine  into  the  considerations  connected  with  the 
domestic  aspect  of  the  subject. 

What  are  the  propositions  before  the  committee  ?  The  first  in  order,  is 
that  reported  by  the  military  committee,  which  asserts  the  disapprobation 
of  this  House,  of  the  proceedings  in  the  trial  and  execution  of  Arbuthnot 
and  Ambrister.  The  second,  being  the  first  contained  in  the  proposed 
amendment,  is  the  consequenae  of  that  disapprobation,  and  contemplates 
the  passage  of  a  law  to  prohibit  the  execution  hereafter  of  any  captive, 
taken  by  the  army,  without  the  approbation  of  the  president.  The  third 
proposition  is,  that  this  House  disapproves  of  the  forcible  seizure  of  the 
Spanish  posts,  as  contrary  to  orders,  and  in  violation  of  the  Constitution. 
The  fourth  proposition,  as  the  result  of  the  last,  is,  that  a  law  shall  pass  to 
prohibit  the  march  of  the  army  of  the  United  States,  or  any  corps  of  it, 
into  any  foreign  territory,  without  the  previous  authorization  of  Congress, 
except  it  be  in  fresh  pursuit  of  a  defeated  enemy.  The  first  and  third  are 
general  propositions,  declaring  the  sense  of  the  House  in  regard  to  the 
evils  pointed  out ;  and  the  second  and  fourth,  propose  the  legislative  rem- 
edies against  the  recurrence  of  those  evils. 

It  will  be  at  once  perceived,  by  this  simple  statement  of  the  proposi- 
tions, that  no  other  censure  is  proposed  against  General  Jackson  himself, 
than  what  is  merely  consequential.  His  name  even  does  not  appear  in 
any  of  the  resolutions.  The  Legislature  of  the  country,  in  reviewing  the 
state  of  the  Union,  and  considering  the  events  which  have  transpired  since 
its  last  meeting,  finds  that  particular  occurrences,  of  the  greatest  moment, 
in  many  respects,  have  taken  place  near  our  southern  border.  I  will  add, 
that  the  House  has  not  sought,  by  any  officious  interference  with  the  do- 
ings of  the  executive,  to  gain  jurisdiction  over  this  matter.  The  president, 
in  his  message  at  the  opening  of  the  session,  communicated  the  very  in- 
formation on  which  it  was  proposed  to  act.  I  would  ask  for  what  pur- 
pose ?  That  we  should  fold  our  arms  and  yield  a  tacit  acquiescence,  even 
if  we  supposed  that  information  disclosed  alarming  events,  not  merely  as  it 
regards  the  peace  of  the  country,  but  in  respect  to  its  Constitution  and 
character  ?  Impossible.  In  communicating  these  papers,  and  voluntarily 
calling  the  attention  of  Congress  to  the  subject,  the  president  must  himself 
have  intended,  that  we  should  apply  any  remedy  that  we  might  be  able  to 
devise.  Having  the  subject  thus  regularly  and  fairly  before  us,  and  pro- 
posing merely  to  collect  the  sense  of  the  House  upon  certain  important 
transactions  which  it  discloses,  with  the  view  to  the  passage  of  such  laws 
as  may  be  demanded  by  the  public  interest,  I  repeat,  that  there  is  no 
censure  anywhere,  except  such  as  is  strictly  consequential  upon  our  legis- 
lative action.     The  supposition  of  every  new  law,  having  for  its  object  to 


ON   THE   SEMINOLE   WAR.  183 

prevent  the  recurrence  of  evil,  is,  that  something  has  happened  which 
ought  not  to  have  taken  place,  and  no  other  than  this  indirect  sort  of  cen- 
sure will  flow  from  the  resolutions  before  the  committee. 

Having  thus  given  my  view  of  the  nature  and  character  of  the  proposi- 
tions under  consideration,  I  am  far  from  intimating  that  it  is  not  my 
purpose  to  go  into  a  full,  a  free,  and  a  thorough  investigation  of  the  facts, 
and  of  the  principles  of  law,  public,  municipal,  and  constitutional,  involved 
in  them.  And,  while  I  trust  I  shall  speak  with  the  decorum  due  to  the 
distinguished  officers  of  the  government  whose  proceedings  are  to  be  ex- 
amined, I  shall  exercise  the  independence  which  belongs  to  me  as  a  rep- 
resentative of  the  people,  in  freely  and  fully  submitting  my  sentiments. 

In  noticing  the  painful  incidents  of  this  war,  it  is  impossible  not  to 
inquire  into  its  origin.  I  fear  that  it  will  be  found  to  be  the  famous  treaty 
of  Fort  Jackson,  concluded  in  August,  1814  ;  and  I  must  ask  the  indulg- 
ence of  the  chairman  while  I  read  certain  parts  of  that  treaty. 

"  Whereas,  an  unprovoked,  inhuman,  sanguinary  war,  waged  by  the  hostile 
Creeks  against  the  United  States,  hath  been  repelled,  prosecuted,  and  deter- 
mined, successfully  on  the  part  of  the  said  States,  in  conformity  with  principles 
of  national  justice  and  honorable  warfare :  and,  whereas,  consideration  is  due  to 
the  rectitude  of  proceedings  dictated  by  instructions  relating  to  the  re-establish- 
ing of  peace :  Be  it  remembered  that,  prior  to  the  conquest  of  that  part  of  the 
Creek  nation  hostile  to  the  United  States,  numberless  aggressions  had  been 
committed  against  the  peace,  the  property,  and  the  lives  of  citizens  of  the 
United  States,  and  those  of  the  Creek  nation  in  amity  with  her,  at  the  mouth 
of  Duck  River,  Fort  Mimms,  and  elsewhere,  contrary  to  national  faith  and  the 
regard  due  to  an  article  of  the  treaty  concluded  at  New  York,  in  the  year  1790, 
between  the  two  nations ;  that  the  United  States,  previous  to  the  perpetration 
of  such  outrage,  did,  in  order  to  insure  future  amity  and  concord  between  the 
Creek  nation  and  the  said  States,  in  conformity  with  the  stipulations  of  former 
treaties,  fulfill,  with  punctuality  and  good  faith,  her  engagements  to  the  said 
nation;  that  more  than  two  thirds  of  the  whole  number  of  chiefs  and  warriore 
of  the  Creek  nation,  disregarding  the  genuine  spirit  of  existing  treaties,  suffered 
themselves  to  be  instigated  to  violations  of  their  national  honor  and  the  respect 
due  to  a  part  of  their  own  nation  faithful  to  the  United  States  and  the  principles 
of  humanity,  by  impostors,  denominating  themselves  prophets,  and  by  the  du- 
plicity and  misrepresentations  of  foreign  emissaries,  whose  governments  are  at 
war,  open  or  understood,  with  the  United  States. 

"  Article  2.  The  United  States  will  guaranty  to  the  Creek  nation  the  integrity 
of  all  their  territory  eastwardly  and  northwardly  of  the  said  line  (described  in 
the  first  article),  to  be  run  and  described  as  mentioned  in  the  first  article. 

"  Article  3.  The  United  States  demand  that  the  Creek  nation  abandon  all 
communication,  and  cease  to  hold  intercourse  with  any  British  post,  garrison,  or 
town ;  and  that  they  shall  not  admit  among  them  any  agent  or  trader  who  shall 
not  derive  authority  to  hold  commercial  or  other  intercourse  with  them,  by  li- 
cense of  the  president  or  other  authorized  agent  of  the  United  States. 

"  Article  4.  The  United  States  demand  an  acknowledgment  of  the  right  to 
establish  military  posts  and  trading-houses,  and  to  open  roads  witliin  the  ter- 


184  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

ritory  guarantied  to  the  Creek  nation  by  the  second  article,  and  a  right  to  the 
free  navigation  of  all  us  waters. 

"  Article  5.  The  United  States  demand  that  a  surrender  be  immediately 
made,  of  all  the  persons  and  property  taken  from  the  citizens  of  the  United 
States,  the  friendly  part  of  the  Creek  nation,  the  Cherokee,  Chickasaw,  and 
Choctaw  nations,  to  the  respective  owners ;  and  the  United  States  will  cause  to 
be  immediately  restored  to  the  formerly  hostile  Creeks  all  the  property  taken 
from  them  since  their  submission,  either  by  the  United  States,  or  by  any  Indian 
nations  m  amity  with  the  United  States,  together  with  all  the  prisoners  taken 
from  them  during  the  war. 

"  Article  6.  The  United  States  demand  the  caption  and  surrender  of  all  the 
prophets  and  instigators  of  the  war,  whether  foreigners  or  natives,  who  have 
not  submitted  to  the  arms  of  the  United  States,  and  become  parties  to  these 
articles  of  capitulation,  if  ever  they  shall  be  found  within  the  territory  guaran- 
tied to  the  Creek  nation  by  the  second  article, 

"Article  7.  The  Creek  nation  being  reduced  to  extreme  want,  and  not,  at 
present,  having  the  means  of  subsistence,  the  United  States,  from  motives  of 
humanity,  will  continue  to  furnish  gratuitously  the  necessaries  of  life,  until  the 
crops  of  corn  can  be  considered  competent  to  yield  the  nation  a  supply,  and 
will  establish  trading-houses  in  the  nation,  at  the  discretion  of  the  President  of 
the  United  States,  and  at  such  places  as  he  shall  direct,  to  enable  the  nation,  by 
industry  and  economy,  to  procure  clothing." 

I  have  never  perused  this  instrument  until  within  a  few  days  past,  and 
I  have  read  it  with  the  deepest  mortification  and  regret.  A  more  dicta- 
torial spirit  I  have  never  seen  displayed  in  any  instrument.  I  would  chal- 
lenge an  examination  of  all  the  records  of  diplomacy,  not  excepting  even 
those  in  the  most  haughty  period  of  imperial  Rome,  when  she  was  carry- 
ing her  arms  into  the  barbarian  nations  that  surrounded  her,  and  I  do  not 
believe  a  solitary  instance  can  be  found  of  such  an  inexorable  spirit  of 
domination  pervading  a  compact  purporting  to  be  a  treaty  of  peace.  It 
consists  of  the  most  severe  and  humiliating  demands — of  the  surrender  of 
a  large  territory ;  of  the  privilege  of  making  roads  through  the  remnant 
which  was  retained  ;  of  the  right  of  establishing  trading-houses ;  of  the  ob- 
ligation of  delivering  into  our  hands  their  prophets.  And  all  this  of  a 
wretched  people  reduced  to  the  last  extremity  of  distress,  whose  miserable 
existence  we  have  to  preserve  by  a  voluntary  stipulation  to  furnish  them 
with  bread  !  When  did  the  all-conquering  and  desolating  Rome  ever  fail 
to  respect  the  altars  and  the  gods  of  those  whom  she  subjugated  ?  Let  me 
not  be  told  that  these  prophets  were  impostors  who  deceived  the  Indians. 
They  were  their  prophets ;  the  Indians  believed  and  venerated  them,  and  it 
is  not  for  us  to  dictate  a  religious  belief  to  them.  It  does  not  belong  to 
the  holy  character  of  the  religion  which  we  profess,  to  carry  its  precepts,  by 
the  force  of  the  bayonet,  into  the  bosoms  of  other  people.  Mild  and  gentle 
persuasion  was  the  great  instrument  employed  by  the  meek  founder  of  our 
religion.  We  leave  to  the  humane  and  benevolent  efforts  of  the  reverend 
professors  of  Christianity  to  convert  from  barbarism  those  unhappy  nations 


ON   THE    SEMINOLE   WAR.  185 

yet  immersed  in  its  gloom.  But,  sir,  spare  them  their  prophets !  spare 
their  delusions  !  spare  their  prejudices  and  superstitions  !  spare  them  even 
their  religion,  such  as  it  is,  from  open  and  cruel  violence.  When,  sir,  was 
that  treaty  concluded  ?  On  the  very  day,  after  the  protocol  was  signed, 
of  the  first  conference  between  the  American  and  British  commissioners, 
treating  of  peace,  at  Ghent.  In  the  course  of  that  negotiation,  pretensions 
so  enormous  were  set  up  by  the  other  party  that,  when  they  were  promul- 
gated in  this  country,  there  was  one  general  burst  of  indignation  through- 
out the  continent.  Faction  itself  was  silenced,  and  the  firm  and  unanimous 
determination  of  all  parties  was,  to  fight  until  the  last  man  fell  in  the  ditch 
rather  than  submit  to  such  ignominious  terms. 

What  a  contrast  is  exhibited  between  the  cotemporaneous  scenes  of 
Ghent  and  of  Fort  Jackson  !  what  a  powerful  voucher  would  the  British 
commissioners  have  been  furnished  with,  if  they  could  have  got  hold  of 
that  treaty!  The  United  States  demand,  the  United  States  demand,  is 
repeated  five  or  six  times.  And  what  did  the  preamble  itself  disclose  ? 
That  two  thirds  of  the  Creek  nation  had  been  hostile,  and  one  third  only 
friendly  to  us.  Now  I  have  heard  (I  can  not  vouch  for  the  truth  of  the 
statement),  that  not  one  hostile  chief  signed  the  treaty.  I  have  also  heard 
that  perhaps  one  or  two  of  them  did.  If  the  treaty  were  really  made  by  a 
minority  of  the  nation,  it  was  not  obligatory  upon  the  whole  nation.  It 
was  void,  considered  in  the  light  of  a  national  compact.  And,  if  void,  the 
Indians  were  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  the  provision  of  the  ninth  article  of 
the  treaty  of  Ghent,  by  which  we  bound  ourselves  to  make  peace  with  any 
tribes  with  whom  we  might  be  at  war  on  the  ratification  of  the  treaty  and 
to  restore  to  them  their  lands,  as  they  held  them  in  1811.  I  do  not  know 
how  the  honorable  Senate,  that  body  for  which  I  hold  so  high  a  respect, 
could  have  given  their  sanction  to  the  treaty  of  Fort  Jackson,  so  utterly 
irreconcilable  as  it  is  with  those  noble  principles  of  generosity  and  mag- 
nanimity which  I  hope  to  see  my  country  always  exhibit,  and  particularly 
toward  the  miserable  remnant  of  the  aborigines.  It  would  have  comported 
better  with  those  principles  to  have  imitated  the  benevolent  policy  of  the 
founder  of  Pennsylvania,  and  to  have  given  to  the  Creeks  conquered  as  they 
were,  even  if  they  had  made  an  unjust  war  upon  us,  the  trilling  considera- 
tion, to  them  an  adequate  compensation,  which  he  paid  for  their  lands. 
That  treaty,  I  fear,  has  been  the  main  cause  of  the  recent  war.  And,  if  it 
has  been,  it  only  adds  another  melancholy  proof  to  those  with  which  his- 
tory already  abounds,  that  hard  and  unconscionable  terms,  extorted  by  the 
power  of  the  sword  and  the  right  of  conquest,  serve  but  to  whet  and  stim- 
ulate revenge,  and  to  give  old  hostilities,  smothered,  not  extinguished,  by 
the  pretended  peace,  greater  exasperation  and  more  ferocity.  A  truce, 
thus  patched  up  with  an  unfortuuate  people,  without  the  means  of  exist- 
ence, without  bread,  is  no  real  peace.  The  instant  there  is  the  slightest 
prospect  of  relief  from  such  harsh  and  severe  conditions,  the  conquered 
party  will  fly  to  arms,  and  spend  the  last  drop  of  blood  rather  than  live  in 


186  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

such  degraded  bondage.  Even  if  you  again  reduce  him  to  submission,  the 
expenses  incurred  by  this  second  war,  to  say  nothing  of  the  human  lives 
that  are  sacrificed,  will  be  greater  than  what  it  would  have  cost  you  to 
grant  him  liberal  conditions  in  the  first  instance.  This  treaty,  I  repeat, 
was,  I  apprehend,  the  cause  of  the  war.  It  led  to  the  excesses  on  our 
southern  borders  which  began  it.  Who  first  commenced  them,  it  is  per- 
haps difficult  to  ascertain.  There  was,  however,  a  paper  on  this  subject, 
communicated  at  the  last  session  by  the  president,  that  told,  in  language 
pathetic  and  feeling,  an  artless  tale ;  a  paper  that  carried  such  internal 
evidence  at  least  of  the  belief  of  the  authors  of  it  that  they  were 
writing  the  truth,  that  I  will  ask  the  favor  of  the  committee  to  allow  me 
to  read  it. 

"  To  the  Commanding  Officer  at  Fort  Hawkins : 

"  Dear  Sie  ; 

"  Since  the  last  war,  after  you  sent  word  that  we  must  quit  the  war,  we, 
the  red  people,  have  come  over  on  this  side.  The  white  people  have  carried  all 
the  red  people's  cattle  off.  After  the  war,  I  sent  to  all  my  people  to  let  the  white 
people  alone,  and  stay  on  this  side  of  the  river ;  and  they  did  so ;  but  the  white 
people  still  continue  so  carry  off  their  cattle.  Bernard's  son  was  here,  and  I  in- 
quired of  him  what  was  to  be  done ;  and  he  said  we  must  go  to  the  head  man 
of  the  white  people  and  complain.  I  did  so,  and  there  was  no  head  white  man, 
and  there  was  no  law  in  this  case.  The  whites  first  began,  and  there  is  no  tiling 
said  about  that ;  but  great  complaint  about  what  the  Indians  do.  This  is  now 
three  years  since  the  white  people  killed  three  Indians ;  since  that  time  they 
have  killed  three  oilier  Indians,  and  taken  their  horses,  and  what  they  had ;  and 
this  summer  they  killed  three  more  ;  and  very  likely  they  killed  one  more.  We 
sent  word  to  the  white  people  that  these  murders  were  done,  and  the  answer 
was,  that  they  were  people  who  were  outlaws,  and  we  ought  to  go  and  kill 
them.  The  white  people  killed  our  people  first ;  the  Indians  then  took  satisfac- 
tion. There  are  yet  three  men  that  the  red  people  have  never  taken  satisfaction 
for.  You  have  wrote  that  there  were  houses  burned ;  but  we  know  of  no  such 
thing  being  done ;  the  truth,  in  such  cases,  ought  to  be  told,  but  this  appears 
otherwise.  On  that  side  of  the  river,  the  white  people  have  killed  five  Indians, 
but  there  is  nothing  said  about  that ;  and  all  that  the  Indians  have  done  is 
brought  up.  All  the  mischief  the  white  people  have  done,  ought  to  be  told  to  their 
head  man.  When  there  is  any  thing  done,  you  write  to  us ;  but  never  write  to 
your  head  man  what  the  white  people  do.  When  the  red  people  send  talks  or 
write,  they  always  send  the  truth.  You  have  sent  to  us  for  your  horses,  and 
we  sent  all  that  we  could  find  ;  but  there  was  some  dead.  It  appears  that  all 
the  mischief  is  laid  on  this  town ;  but  all  the  mischief  that  has  been  done  by 
this  town,  is  two  horses ;  one  of  them  is  dead,  and  the  other  was  sent  back. 
The  cattle  that  we  are  accused  of  taking,  were  cattle  that  the  white  people  took 
from  us.  Our  young  men  went  and  brought  them  back,  with  the  same  marks 
and  brands.  There  were  some  of  our  young  men  out  hunting,  and  they  were 
killed ;  others  went  to  take  satisfaction,  and  the  kettle  of  one  of  the  men  that  was 
killed  was  found  in  the  house  wThere  the  woman  and  two  children  were  killed ; 
and  they  supposed  it  had  been  her  husband  who  had  killed  the  Indians,  and  took 


ON   THE    SEMINOLE    WAR.  187 

their  satisfaction  there.  We  are  accused  of  killing  the  Americans,  and  so  on  ; 
but  since  the  word  was  sent  to  us  that  peace  was  made,  we  stay  steady  at  home, 
and  meddle  ivith  no  person.  You  have  sent  to  us  respecting  the  black  people  on 
the  Suwany  river ;  we  having  nothing  to  do  with  them.  They  were  put  there 
by  the  English,  and  to  them  you  ought  to  apply  for  any  thing  about  them.  We 
do  not  wish  our  country  desolated  by  an  army  passing  through  it,  for  the  con- 
cern of  other  people.  The  Indians  have  slaves  there  also ;  a  great  many  of 
them.  When  we  have  an  opportunity,  we  shall  apply  to  the  English  for  them ; 
but  we  can  not  get  them  now. 

"  This  is  what  we  have  to  say  at  present. 

"  Sir,  I  conclude  by  subscribing  myself, 

"  Your  humble  servant,  etc. 

"  September,  the  11th  day,  1817. 

"  N.  B.  There  are  ten  towns  have  read  this  letter,  and  this  is  the  answer. 

"A  true  copy  of  the  original.  Wm.  Bell,  Aid-de-camp." 

I  should  be  very  unwilling  to  assert,  in  regard  to  this  war,  that  the  fault 
was  on  our  side ;  I  fear  it  was.  I  have  heard  that  a  very  respectable 
gentleman,  now  no  more,  who  once  rilled  the  executive  chair  of  Georgia, 
and  who,  having  been  agent  of  Indian  affairs  in  that  quarter,  had  the  best 
opportunity  of  judging  of  the  origin  of  this  war,  deliberately  pronounced  it 
as  his  opinion,  that  the  Indians  were  not  in  fault.  I  am  far  from  attribut- 
ing to  General  Jackson  any  other  than  the  very  slight  degree  of  blame  that 
attaches  to  him  as  the  negotiator  of  the  treaty  of  Fort  Jackson,  and  will  be 
shared  by  those  who  subsequently  ratified  and  sanctioned  that  treaty. 
But  if  there  be  even  a  doubt  as  to  the  origin  of  the  war,  whether  we  were 
censurable  or  the  Indians,  that  doubt  will  serve  to  increase  our  regret  at 
any  distressing  incidents  which  may  have  occurred,  and  to  mitigate,  in 
some  degree,  the  crimes  which  Ave  impute  to  the  other  side.  I  know  that 
when  General  Jackson  was  summoned  to  the  field,  it  was  too  late  to  hesi- 
tate ;  the  fatal  blow  had  been  struck,  in  the  destruction  of  Fowl-town, 
and  the  dreadful  massacre  of  Lieutenant  Scott  and  his  detachment ; 
and  the  only  duty  which  remained  to  him,  was  to  terminate  this  unhappy 
contest. 

The  first  circumstance  which,  in  the  course  of  his  performing  that  duty, 
fixed  our  attention,  has  filled  me  with  reo-ret.  It  was  the  execution  of  the 
Indian  chiefs.  How,  I  ask,  did  they  come  into  our  possession  ?  Was  it 
in  the  course  of  fair,  and  open,  and  honorable  war  ?  ftTo  ;  but  by  means 
of  deception — by  hoisting  foreign  colors  on  the  staflf  from  which  the  stars 
and  stripes  should  alone  have  floated.  Thus  insnared,  the  Indians  were 
taken  on  shore  ;  and  without  ceremony,  and  without  delay,  were  hung. 
Hang  an  Indian  !  We,  sir,  who  are  civilized,  and  can  comprehend  and 
feel  the  effect  of  moral  causes  and  considerations,  attach  ignominy  to  that 
mode  of  death.  And  the  gallant,  and  refined,  and  high-minded  man, 
seeks  by  all  possible  means  to  avoid  it.  But  what  cares  an  Iudian  whether 
you  hang  or  shoot  him  \     The  moment  he  is  captured,  he  is  considered  by 


188  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

his  tribe  as  disgraced,  if  not  lost.  They,  too,  are  indifferent  about  the 
manner  in  which  he  is  dispatched.  But  I  regard  the  occurrence  with 
grief,  for  other  and  higher  considerations.  It  was  the  first  instance  that  I 
know  of,  in  the  annals  of  our  country,  in  which  retaliation,  by  executing 
Indian  captives,  has  ever  been  deliberately  practiced.  There  may  have 
been  exceptions,  but  if  there  were,  they  met  with  cotemporaneous  con- 
demnation, and  have  been  reprehended  by  the  just  pen  of  impartial  his- 
tory. The  gentleman  from  Massachusetts  may  tell  me,  if  he  chooses, 
what  he  pleases  about  the  tomahawk  and  scalping-knife  ;  about  Indian 
enormities,  and  foreign  miscreants  and  incendiaries.  I,  too,  hate  them ; 
from  my  very  soul  I  abominate  them.  But  I  love  my  country,  and  its 
Constitution  ;  I  love  liberty  and  safety,  and  fear  military  despotism  more, 
even,  than  I  hate  the  monsters.  The  gentleman,  in  the  course  of  his  re- 
marks, alluded  to  the  State  from  which  I  have  the  honor  to  come.  Little, 
sir,  does  he  know  of  the  high  and  magnanimous  sentiments  of  the  people 
of  that  State,  if  he  supposes  they  will  approve  of  the  transaction  to  which 
he  refeirel.  Brave  and  generous,  humanity  and  clemency  toward  a  fallen 
foe  constitute  one  of  their  noblest  characteristics.  Amid  all  the  struggles 
for  that  fair  land,  between  the  natives  and  the  present  inhabitants,  I  defy 
the  gentleman  to  point  out  one  instance,  in  which  aKentuckian  had  stained 
his  hand  by — nothing  but  my  high  sense  of  the  distinguished  services  and 
exalted  merits  of  General  Jackson,  prevents  my  using  a  different  term — 
the  execution  of  an  unarmed  and  prostrate  captive.  Yes,  there  is  one 
solitary  exception,  in  which  a  man,  enraged  at  beholding  an  Indian  pris- 
oner who  had  been  celebrated  for  his  enormities,  and  who  had  destroyed 
some  of  his  kindred,  plunged  his  sword  into  his  bosom.  The  wicked  deed 
was  considered  as  an  abominable  outrage  when  it  occurred,  and  the  name 
of  the  man  has  been  handed  down  to  the  execration  of  posterity.  I  deny 
your  right  thus  to  retaliate  on  the  aboriginal  proprietors  of  the  country; 
and  unless  I  am  utterly  deceived,  it  may  be  shown  that  it  does  not  exist. 
But  before  I  attempt  this,  allow  me  to  make  the  gentleman  from  Massachu- 
setts a  little  better  acquainted  with  those  people,  to  whose  feelings  and 
sympathies  he  has  appealed  through  their  representative.  During  the  late 
war  with  Great  Britain,  Colonel  Campbell,  under  the  command  of  my 
honorable  fiieud  from  Ohio  (General  Harrison),  was  placed  at  the  head  of 
a  detachment,  consisting  chiefly,  I  believe,  of  Kentucky  volunteers,  in  order 
to  destroy  the  Mississinaway  towns.  They  proceeded  and  performed  the 
duty,  and  took  some  prisoners.  And  here  is  the  evidence  of  the  manner 
in  which  they  treated  them. 

"  But  the  character  of  this  gallant  detachment,  exhibiting,  as  it  did,  persever- 
ance, fortitude,  and  bravery,  would,  however,  be  incomplete,  if  in  the  midst  of 
victory,  they  had  forgotten  the  feelings  of  humanity.  It  is  with  the  sincerest 
pleasure  that  the  general  has  heard,  that  the  most  punctual  obedience  was  paid 
to  his  orders,  in  not  only  saving  all  the  women  and  children,  but  in  sparing  all 
the  warriors  who  ceased  to  ?-esist ;  and  that  even  when  vigorously  attacked  by 


ON   THE    SEMINOLE   WAR. 


m 


the  enemy,  the  claims  of  mercy  prevailed  over  every  sense  of  their  own  danger, 
and  this  heroic  band  respected  the  lives  of  their  prisoners.  Let  an  account  of 
murdered  innocence  be  opened  in  the  records  of  heaven,  against  our  enemies 
alone.  The  American  soldier  will  follow  the  example  of  his  government,  and 
the  sword  of  the  one  will  not  be  against  the  fallen  and  the  helpless,  nor  the 
gold  of  the  other  be  paid  for  scalps  of  a  massacred  enemy." 

I  hope,  sir,  the  honorable  gentleman  will  now  be  able  better  to  appreciate 
the  character  and  conduct  of  my  gallant  countrymen,  than  he  appears 
hitherto  to  have  done. 

But,  sir,  I  have  said  that  you  have  no  right  to  practice,  under  color  of 
retaliation,  enormities  on  the  Indians.  I  will  advance  in  support  of  this 
position,  as  applicable  to  the  origin  of  all  law,  the  principle,  that  whatever 
has  been  the  custom,  from  the  commencement  of  a  subject,  whatever  has 
been  the  uniform  usage,  coeval  and  coexistent  with  the  subject  to  which  it 
relates,  becomes  its  fixed  law.  Such  is  the  foundation  of  all  common 
law;  and  such,  I  believe,  is  the  principal  foundation  of  all  public  or  inter- 
national law.  If,  then,  it  can  be  shown  that  from  the  first  settlement  of 
the  colonies,  on  this  part  of  the  American  continent,  to  the  present  time, 
we  have  constantly  abstained  from  retaliating  upon  the  Indians  the  excesses 
practiced  by  them  toward  us,  we  are  morally  bound  by  this  invariable 
usage,  and  can  not  lawfully  change  it  without  the  most  cogent  reasons. 
So  far  as  my  knowledge  extends,  from  the  first  settlement  at  Plymouth  or 
at  Jamestown,  it  has  not  been  our  practice  to  destroy  Indian  captives, 
combatants  or  non  combatants.  I  know  of  but  one  deviation  from  the 
code  which  regulates  the  warfare  between  civilized  communities,  and  that 
was  the  destruction  of  Indian  towns,  which  was  suppoeed  to  be  authorized 
upon  the  ground  that  we  could  not  bring  the  war  to  a  termination  but  by 
destroying  the  means  which  nourished  it.  With  this  single  exception,  the 
other  principles  of  the  laws  of  civilized  nations  are  extended  to  them,  and 
are  thus  made  law  in  regard  to  them. 

When  did  this  humane  custom,  by  which,  in  consideration  of  their  ig- 
norance, and  our  enlightened  condition,  the  rigors  of  war  were  mitigated, 
begin  ?  At  a  time  when  we  were  weak,  and  they  comparatively  strong; 
when  they  were  the  lords  of  the  soil,  and  we  were  seeking,  from  the  vices, 
from  the  corruptions,  from  the  religious  intolerance,  and  from  the  oppres- 
sions of  Europe,  to  gain  an  asylum  among  them.  And  when  it  is  proposed 
to  change  this  custom,  to  substitute  for  it  the  bloody  maxims  of  barbarous 
ages,  and  to  interpolate  the  Indian  public  law  with  revolting  cruelties? 
At  a  time  when  the  situation  of  the  two  parties  is  totally  changed — when 
we  are  powerful  and  they  are  weak — at  a  time  when,  to  use  a  figure  drawn 
from  their  own  sublime  eloquence,  the  poor  children  of  the  forest  have 
been  driven  by  the  great  wave  which  has  flowed  in  from  the  Atlantic 
ocean  almost  to  the  base  of  the  Rocky  Mountains,  and,  overwhelming  them 
in  its  terrible  progress,  has  left  no  other  remains  of  hundreds  of  tribes, 
now  extinct,  than  those  which  indicate  the  remote  existence  of  their  former 


190  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

companion,  the  mammoth  of  the  new  world  !  Yes,  sir,  it  is  at  this  aus- 
picious period  of  our  country,  when  we  hold  a  proud  and  lofty  station 
among  the  first  nations  of  the  world,  that  we  are  called  upon  to  sanction 
a  departure  from  the  established  laws  and  usages  which  have  regulated  our 
Indian  hostilities.  And  does  tbe  honorable  gentleman  from  Massachusetts 
expect,  in  this  august  body,  this  enlightened  assembly  of  Christians  and 
Americans,  by  glowing  appeals  to  our  passions,  to  make  us  forget  our 
principles,  our  religion,  our  clemency,  and  our  humanity  ?  Why  is  it  that 
we  have  not  practiced  toward  the  Indian  tribes  the  right  of  retaliation, 
now  for  the  first  time  asserted  in  regard  to  them  ?  It  is  because  it  is  a 
principle  proclaimed  by  reason  and  enforced  by  every  respectable  writer 
on  the  law  of  nations,  that  retaliation  is  only  justifiable  as  calculated  to 
produce  effect  in  the  war.  Vengeance  is  a  new  motive  for  resorting  to  it. 
If  retaliation  will  produce  no  effect  on  the  enemy,  we  are  bound  to  abstain 
from  it  by  every  consideration  of  humanity  and  of  justice.  Will  it,  then, 
produce  effect  on  the  Indian  tribes  ?  No  ;  they  care  not  about  the  execu- 
tion of  those  of  their  warriors  who  are  taken  captive.  They  are  considered 
as  disgraced  by  the  very  circumstance  of  their  captivity,  and  it  is  often 
mercy  to  the  unhappy  captive  to  deprive  him  of  his  existence.  The  poet 
evinced  a  profound  knowledge  of  the  Indian  character,  when  he  put  into 
the  mouth  of  a  son  of  a  distinguished  chief,  about  to  be  led  to  the  stake 
and  tortured  by  his  victorious  enemy,  the  words  : 

"  Begin,  ye  tormentors !  your  threats  are  in  vain : 
The  son  of  Alknomook  will  never  complain." 

Retaliation  of  Indian  excesses,  not  producing  then  any  effect  in  prevent- 
ing their  repetition,  is  condemned  by  both  reason  and  the  principles  upon 
which  alone,  in  any  case,  it  can  be  justified.  On  this  branch  of  the  sub- 
ject much  more  might  be  said,  but  as  I  shall  possibly  again  allude  to  it,  I 
will  pass  from  it  for  the  present,  to  another  topic. 

It  is  not  necessary,  for  the  purpose  of  my  argument  in  regard  to  the 
trial  and  execution  of  Arbuthnot  and  Ambrister,  to  insist  on  the  innocency 
of  either  of  them.  I  will  yield  for  the  sake  of  that  argument,  without 
inquiry,  that  both  of  them  were  guilty  ;  that  both  had  instigated  the  war ; 
and  that  one  of  them  had  led  the  enemy  to  battle.  It  is  possible,  indeed, 
that  a  critical  examination  of  the  evidence  would  show,  particularly  in  the 
case  of  Arbuthnot,  that  the  whole  amount  of  his  crime  consisted  in  his 
trading,  without  the  limits  of  the  United  States,  with  the  Seminole  Indians, 
in  the  accustomed  commodities  which  form  the  subject  of  Indian  trade, 
and  that  he  sought  to  ingratiate  himself  with  his  customers  by  espousing 
their  interests,  in  regard  to  the  provision  of  the  treaty  of  Ghent,  which 
he  may  have  honestly  believed  entitled  them  to  the  restoration  of  their 
lands.  And  if,  indeed,  the  treaty  of  Fort  Jackson,  for  the  reasons  already 
assigned,  were  not  binding  upon  the  Creeks,  there  would  be  but  too  much 
cause  to  lament  his  unhappy  if  not  unjust  fate.     The  first  impression  made 


ON  THE   SEMINOLE   WAR.  191 

on  the  examination  of  the  proceedings  in  the  trial  and  execution  of  those 
two  men  is,  that  on  the  part  of  Ambrister  there  was  the  most  guilt,  but, 
at  the  same  time,  the  most  irregularity.  Conceding  the  point  of  guilt  of 
both,  with  the  qualification  which  I  have  stated,  I  will  proceed  to  inquire, 
first,  if  their  execution  can  be  justified  upon  the  principles  assumed  by  General 
Jackson  himself.  If  they  do  not  afford  a  justification,  I  will  next  inquire,  if 
there  be  any  other  principles  authorizing  their  execution  ;  and  I  will  in  the 
third  place  make  some  other  observations  upon  the  mode  of  proceeding. 

The  principle  assumed  by  General  Jackson,  which  may  be  found  in  his 
general  orders  commanding  the  execution  of  these  men,  is,  "  that  it  is  an 
established  principle  of  the  law  of  nations,  that  any  individual  of  a  nation 
making  war  against  the  citizens  of  any  other  nation,  they  being  at  peace, 
forfeits  his  allegiance,  and  becomes  an  outlaw,  and  a  pirate."  Whatever 
may  be  the  character  of  individuals  waging  private  war,  the  principle  as- 
sumed is  totally  erroneous  when  applied  to  such  individuals  associated  with 
a  power,  whether  Indian  or  civilized,  capable  of  maintaining  the  relations 
of  peace  and  war.  Suppose,  however,  the  principle  were  true,  as  asserted, 
what  disposition  should  he  have  made  of  these  men  ?  What  jurisdic- 
tion, and  how  acquired,  has  the  military  over  pirates,  robbers,  and  outlaws  ? 
If  they  were  in  the  character  imputed,  they  were  alone  amenable,  and 
should  have  been  turned  over  to,  the  civil  authority.  But  the  principle, 
I  repeat,  is  totally  incorrect,  when  applied  to  men  in  their  situation.  A 
foreigner  connecting  himself  with  a  belligerent,  becomes  an  enemy  of  the 
party  to  whom  that  belligerent  is  opposed,  subject  to  whatever  he  may  be 
subject,  entitled  to  whatever  he  is  entitled.  Arbuthnot  and  Ambrister,  by 
associating  themselves,  became  identified  with  the  Indians ;  they  became 
our  enemies,  and  we  had  a  right  to  treat  them  as  we  could  lawfully  treat 
the  Indians.  These  positions  are  so  obviously  correct,  that  I  shall  consider 
it  an  abuse  of  the  patience  of  the  committee  to  consume  time  in  their 
proof.  They  are  supported  by  the  practice  of  all  nations,  and  of  our  own. 
Every  page  of  history,  in  all  times,  and  the  recollection  of  every  member, 
furnish  evidence  of  their  truth.  Let  us  look  for  a  moment  into  some  of 
the  consequences  of  this  principle,  if  it  were  to  go  to  Europe,  sanctioned 
by  the  approbation,  express  or  implied,  of  this  House.  We  have  now  in 
our  armies  probably  the  subjects  of  almost  every  European  power.  Some 
of  the  nations  of  Europe  maintain  the  doctrine  of  perpetual  allegiance. 
Suppose  Britain  and  America  in  peace,  and  America  and  France  at  war. 
The  former  subjects  of  England,  naturalized  and  unnaturalized,  are  cap- 
tured by  the  navy  or  army  of  France.  What  is  their  condition  ?  Ac- 
cording to  the  principle  of  General  Jackson,  they  would  be  outlaws  and 
pirates,  and  liable  to  immediate  execution.  Are  gentlemen  prepared  to 
return  to  their  respective  districts  with  this  doctrine  in  their  mouths,  and 
to  say  to  their  Irish,  English,  Scotch,  and  other  foreign  constituents,  that 
they  are  liable,  on  the  contingency  supposed,  to  be  treated  as  outlaws  and 
pirates  ? 


192  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

Is  there  any  other  principle  which  justifies  the  proceedings?  On  this 
subject,  if  I  admire  the  wonderful  ingenuity  with  which  gentlemen  seek  a 
colorable  pretext  for  those  executions,  I  am  at  the  same  time  shocked  at 
some  of  the  principles  advanced.  What  said  the  honorable  gentleman 
from  Massachusetts  (Mr.  Holmes),  in  a  cold  address  to  the  committee  ? 
Why,  that  these  executions  were  only  the  wrong  mode  of  doing  a  right 
thing.  A  wrong  mode  of  doing  the  right  thing  I  In  what  code  of  public 
law  ;  in  what  system  of  ethics  ;  nay,  in  what  respectable  novel ;  where,  if 
the  gentleman  were  to  take  the  range  of  the  whole  literature  of  the  world, 
will  lie  find  any  sanction  for  a  principle  so  monstrous  ?  I  will  illustrate  its 
enormity  by  a  single  case.  Suppose  a  man,  being  guilty  of  robbery,  is 
tried,  condemned,  and  executed,  for  murder,  upon  an  indictment  for  that 
robbery  merely.  The  judge  is  arraigned  for  having  executed,  contrary  to 
law,  a  human  being,  innocent  at  heart  of  the  crime  for  which  he  was  sen- 
tenced. The  judge  has  nothing  to  do,  to  insure  his  own  acquittal,  but  to 
urge  the  gentleman's  plea,  that  he  had  done  a  right  thing  in  a  wrong 
way ! 

The  principles  which  attached  to  the  cases  of  Arbuthnot  and  Ambrister, 
constituting  them  merely  participes  in  the  war,  supposing  them  to  have 
been  combatants,  which  the  former  was  not,  he  having  been  taken  in  a 
Spanish  fortress,  without  arms  in  his  hands,  all  that  we  could  possibly  have 
a  right  to  do,  was  to  apply  to  them  the  rules  which  we  had  a  right  to  en- 
force against  the  Indians.     Their  English  character  was  only  merged  in 
their  Indian  character.     Now,  if  the  law  regulating  Indian  hostilities  be 
established  by  long  and  immemorial  usage,  that  we  have  no  moral  right 
to  retaliate  upon  them,  we  consequently  had  no  right  to  retaliate  upon 
Arbuthnot  and  Ambrister.     Even  if  it  were  admitted  that,  in  regard  to 
future  wars,  and  to  other  foreigners,  their  execution  may  have  a  good 
effect,  it  would  not  thence  follow  that  you  had  a  right  to  execute  them. 
It  is  not  always  just  to  do  what  may  be  advantageous.     And  retaliation, 
during  a  war,  must  have  relation  to  the  events  of  that  war,  and  must,  to 
be  just,  have  an  operation  on  that  war,  and  upon  the  individuals  only  who 
compose  the  belligerent  party.     It  becomes  gentlemen,  then,  on  the  other 
side,  to  show,  by  some  known,  certain,  and  recognized  rule  of  public  or 
municipal  law,  that  the  execution  of  these  men  was  justified.     Where  is 
it  ?     I  should  be  glad  to  see  it.     We  are  told  in  a  paper  emanating  from 
the  Department  of  State,  recently  laid  before  this  House,  distinguished  for 
the  fervor  of  its  eloquence,  and  of  wdiich  the  honorable  gentleman  from 
Massachusetts  has  supplied  us  in  part  with  a  second  edition,  in  one   re- 
spect agreeing  with  the  prototype — that  they  both  ought  to  be  inscribed  to 
the  American  public — we  are  justly  told  in  that  paper,  that  this  is  the  first 
instance  of  the  execution  of  persons  for  the  crime  of  instigating  Indians  to 
war.     Sir,  there  are  two  topics  which,  in  Europe,  are  constantly  employed 
by  the  friends  and  minions  of  legitimacy  against  our  country.     The  one  is 
an  inordinate  spirit  of  aggrandizement — of  coveting  other  people's  goods ; 


ON   THE    SEMINOLE    WAR.  193 

the  other  is  the  treatment  which  we  extend  to  the  Indians.  Against  both 
these  charges,  the  public  servants  who  conducted  at  Ghent  the  negotiations 
with  the  British  commissioners,  endeavored  to  vindicate  our  country,  and  I 
hope  with  some  degree  of  success.  What  will  be  the  condition  of  future 
American  negotiators  when  pressed  upon  this  head,  I  know  not,  after  the 
unhappy  executions  on  our  southern  border.  The  gentleman  from  Massa- 
chusetts seemed  yesterday  to  read,  with  a  sort  of  triumph,  the  names  of 
the  commissioners  employed  in  the  negotiation  at  Ghent.  Will  he  excuse 
me  for  saying,  that  I  thought  he  pronounced,  even  with  more  complacency 
and  with  a  more  gracious  smile,  the  first  name  in  the  commission,  than  he 
emphasized  that  of  the  humble  individual  who  addresses  you  1 

[Mr.  Holmes  desired  to  explain.] 

There  is  no  occasion  for  explanation  ;  I  am  perfectly  satisfied. 

[Mr.  Holmes,  however,  proceeded  to  say  that  his  intention  was,  in  pronoun- 
cing the  gentleman's  name,  to  add,  to  the  respect  due  to  the  negotiator,  that 
which  was  due  to  the  Speaker  of  this  House.] 

To  return  to  the  case  of  Arbuthnot  and  Ambrister.  Will  the  principle 
of  these  men  having  been  the  instigators  of  the  war,  justify  their  execution  ? 
It  is  a  new  one  ;  there  are  no  landmarks  to  guide  us  in  its  adoption,  or  to 
prescribe  limits  in  its  application.  If  William.\Pitt  had  been  taken  by  the 
French  army,  during  the  late  European  war,  could  France  have  justifiably 
executed  him  on  the  ground  of  his  having  notoriously  instigated  the  con- 
tinental powers  to  war  against  France  ?  Would  France,  if  she  had  stained 
her  character  by  executing  him,  have  obtained  the  sanction  of  the  world 
to  the  act,  by  appeals  to  the  passions  and  prejudices,  by  pointing  to  the 
cities  sacked,  the  countries  laid  waste,  the  human  lives  sacrificed  in  the 
wars  which  he  had  kindled,  and  by  exclaiming  to  the  unfortunate  captive, 
You,  miscreant,  monster,  have  occasioned  all  these  scenes  of  devastation 
and  blood  ?  What  has  been  the  conduct  even  of  England  toward  the 
greatest  instigator  of  all  the  wars  of  the  present  age  ?  The  condemnation 
of  that  illustrious  man  to  the  rock  of  St.  Helena,  is  a  great  blot  on  the  En- 
glish name.  And  I  repeat  what  I  have  before  said,  that  if  Chatham,  or  Fox, 
or  even  William  Pitt  himself,  had  been  prime  minister  in  England,  Bona- 
parte had  never  been  so  condemned.  On  that  transaction  history  will  one 
day  pass  its  severe  but  just  censure.  Yes,  although  Napoleon  had  desolat- 
ed half  Europe ;  although  there  was  scarcely  a  power,  however  humble, 
that  escaped  the  mighty  grasp  of  his  ambition ;  although  in  the  course  of 
his  splendid  career,  he  is  charged  with  having  committed  the  greatest  atro- 
cities, disgraceful  to  himself  and  to  human  nature,  yet  even  his  life  has 
been  spared.  The  allies  would  not,  England  would  not,  execute  him  upon 
the  ground  of  his  being  an  instigator  of  wars. 

The  mode  of  the  trial  and  sentencing  of  these  men  was  equally  objeet- 

13 


194  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

ionable  with  the  principles  on  which  it  has  been  attempted  to  prove  a  for- 
feiture of  their  lives.  I  know  the  laudable  spirit  which  prompted  the  in- 
genuity displayed  in  finding  out  a  justification  for  these  proceedings.  I 
wish  most  sincerely  that  I  could  reconcile  them  to  my  conscience.  It  has 
been  attempted  to  vindicate  the  general  upon  grounds  which  I  am  persuad- 
ed he  would  himself  disown.  It  has  been  asserted,  that  he  was  guilty  of  a 
mistake  in  calling  upon  the  court  to  try  them,  and  that  he  might  at  once  have 
ordered  their  execution,  without  that  formality.  I  deny  that  there  was  any 
such  absolute  right  in  the  commander  of  any  portion  of  our  army.  The 
right  of  retaliation  is  an  attribute  of  sovereignty.  It  is  comprehended  in 
the  war-making  power  that  Congress  possesses.  It  belongs  to  this  body 
not  only  to  declare  war,  but  to  raise  armies,  and  to  make  rules  and  regula- 
tions for  their  government.  It  is  in  vain  for  gentlemen  to  look  to  the  law 
of  nations  for  instances  in  which  retaliation  is  lawful.  The  laws  of  nations 
merely  lay  down  the  principle  or  rule ;  it  belongs  to  the  government  to 
constitute  the  tribunal  for  applying  that  principle  or  rule.  There  is,  for 
example,  no  instance  in  which  the  death  of  a  captive  is  more  certainly  de- 
clared by  the  law  of  nations  to  be  justifiable,  than  in  the  case  of  spies. 
Congress  has  accordingly  provided,  in  the  rules  and  articles  of  war,  a  tri- 
bunal for  the  trial  of  spies,  and  consequently  for  the  application  of  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  national  law.  The  Legislature  has  not  left  the  power  over  spies 
undefined,  to  the  mere  discretion  of  the  commander-in-chief,  or  of  any 
subaltern  officer  in  the  army.  For,  if  the  doctrines  now  contended  for 
were  true,  they  would  apply  to  the  commander  of  any  corps,  however 
small,  acting  as  a  detachment.  Suppose  Congress  had  not  legislated  in  the 
case  of  spies,  what  would  have  been  their  condition  ?  It  would  have  been 
a  casus  omissus,  and  although  the  public  law  pronounced  their  doom,  it 
could  not  be  executed,  because  Congress  had  assigned  no  tribunal  for  en- 
forcing that  public  law.  No  man  can  be  executed  in  this  free  country 
without  two  things  being  shown — first,  that  the  law  condemns  him  to  death  ; 
and,  secondly,  that  his  death  is  pronounced  by  that  tribunal  which  is  au- 
thorized by  the  law  to  try  him.  These  principles  will  reach  every  man's 
case,  native  or  foreign,  citizen  or  alien.  The  instant  quarters  are  granted 
to  a  prisoner,  the  majesty  of  the  law  surrounds  and  sustains  him,  and  he 
can  not  be  lawfully  punished  with  death  without  the  concurrence  of  the 
two  circumstances  just  insisted  upon.  I  deny  that  any  commander-in-chief, 
in  this  country,  has  this  absolute  power  of  life  and  death,  at  his  sole  discre- 
tion. It  is  contrary  to  the  genius  of  all  our  laws  and  institutions.  To  con- 
centrate in  the  person  of  one  individual  the  powers  to  make  the  rule,  to 
judge  and  to  execute  the  rule,  or  to  judge  and  execute  the  rule  only,  is  ut- 
terly irreconcilable  with  every  principle  of  free  government,  and  is  the 
very  definition  of  tyranny  itself;  and  I  trust  that  this  House  will  never  give 
even  a  tacit  assent  to  such  a  principle.  Suppose  the  commander  had  made 
even  reprisals  on  property,  would  that  property  have  belonged  to  the  na- 
tion, or  could  he  have  disposed  of  it  as  he  pleased  ?     Had  he  more  power, 


ON   THE   SEMINOLE   WAR.  195 

will  gentlemen  tell  me,  over  the  lives  of  human  beings  than  over  property  ? 
The  assertion  of  such  a  power  to  the  commander-in-chief  is  contrary  to 
the  practice  of  the  government. 

By  an  act  of  Congress  which  passed  in  1*799,  vesting  the  power  of  re- 
taliation in  certain  cases  in  the  president  of  the  United  States — an  act 
which  passed  during  the  quasi  war  with  France — the  president  is  autho- 
rized to  retaliate  upon  any  of  the  citizens  of  the  French  republic,  the  enor- 
mities which  may  be  practiced,  in  certain  cases,  upon  our  citizens.  Under 
what  administration  was  this  act  passed  ?  It  was  under  that  which  has 
been  justly  charged  with  stretching  the  Constitution  to  enlarge  the  execu- 
tive powers.  Even  during  the  mad  career  of  Mr.  Adams,  when  every 
means  was  resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of  iufusing  vigor  into  the  executive 
arm,  no  one  thought  of  claiming  for  him  the  inherent  right  of  retaliation. 
I  will  not  trouble  the  House  with  reading  another  law,  which  passed  thir- 
teen or  fourteen  years  after,  during  the  late  war  with  Great  Britain,  under 
the  administration  of  that  great  constitutional  president,  the  father  of  the 
instrument  itself,  by  which  Mr.  Madison  was  empowered  to  retaliate  on 
the  British  in  certain  instances.  It  is  not  only  contrary  to  the  genius  of 
our  institutions,  and  to  the  uniform  practice  of  the  government,  but  it  is 
contrary  to  the  obvious  principles  on  which  the  general  himself  proceeded  ; 
for,  in  forming  the  court,  he  evidently  intended  to  proceed  under  the  rules 
and  articles  of  war.  The  extreme  number  which  they  provide  for  is  thir- 
teen, precisely  that  which  is  detailed  in  the  present  instance.  The  court 
proceeded  not  by  a  bare  plurality,  but  by  a  majority  of  two  thirds.  In 
the  general  orders  issued  from  the  adjutant-general's  office,  at  head-quar- 
ters, it  is  described  as  a  court-martial.  The  prisoners  are  said,  in  those 
orders,  to  have  been  tried,  "  on  the  following  charges  and  specifications." 
The  court  understood  itself  to  be  acting  as  a  court-martial.  It  was  so 
organized,  it  so  proceeded,  having  a  judge  advocate,  hearing  witnesses, 
and  the  written  defense  of  the  miserable  trembling  prisoners,  who  seemed 
to  have  a  presentiment  of  their  doom.  And  the  court  was  finally  dissolved. 
The  whole  proceeding  manifestly  shows,  that  all  parties  considered  it  as  a 
court-martial,  convened  and  acting  under  the  rules  and  articles  of  war. 
In  his  letter  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  noticing  the  transaction,  the  general 
says,  "  these  individuals  were  tried  under  my  orders,  legally  convicted  as 
exciters  of  this  savage  and  negro  war,  legally  condemned,  and  most  justly 
punished  for  their  iniquities."  The  Lord  deliver  us  from  such  legal  conviction 
and  such  legal  condemnation  !  The  general  himself  considered  the  laws  of 
his  country  to  have  justified  his  proceedings.  It  is  in  vain  then  to  talk  of  a 
power  in  him  beyond  the  law,  and  above  the  law,  when  he  himself  does  not 
assert  it.  Let  it  be  conceded  that  he  was  clothed  with  absolute  authority 
over  the  lives  of  those  individuals,  and  that,  upon  his  own  fiat,  without  trial, 
without  defense,  he  might  have  commanded  their  execution.  Now,  if  an 
absolute  sovereign,  in  any  particular  respect,  promulgates  a  rule,  which  he 
pledges  himself  to  observe,  if  he  subsequently  deviates  from  that  rule,  he 


196  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY    CLAY. 

subjects  himself  to  the  imputation  of  odious  tyranny.  If  General  Jackson 
had  the  power,  without  a  court,  to  condemn  these  men,  he  had  also  the 
power  to  appoint  a  tribunal.  He  did  appoint  a  tribunal,  and  became, 
therefore,  morally  bound  to  observe  and  execute  the  sentence  of  that  tri- 
bunal. In  regard  to  Ambiister,  it  is  with  grief  and  pain  I  am  compelled  to 
say,  that  he  was  executed  in  defiance  of  all  law ;  in  defiance  of  the  law  to 
which  General  Jackson  had  voluntarily,  if  you  please,  submitted  himself, 
and  given,  by  his  appeal  to  the  court,  his  implied  pledge  to  observe.  I 
know  but  little  of  military  law,  and  what  has  happened,  has  certainly  not 
created  in  me  a  taste  for  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  more ;  but  I  believe 
there  is  no  example  on  record,  where  the  sentence  of  the  court  has  been 
erase  I,  and  a  sentence  not  pronounced  by  it  carried  into  execution.  It  has 
been  suggested  that  the  court  had  pronounced  two  sentences,  and  that  the 
general  had  a  right  to  select  either.  Two  sentences  !  Two  verdicts !  It 
was  not  so.  The  first  being  revoked,  was  as  though  it  had  never  been 
pronounced.  And  there  remained  only  one  sentence,  which  was  put  aside 
upon  the  sole  authority  of  the  commander,  and  the  execution  of  the 
prisoner  ordered.  He  either  had  or  had  not  a  right  to  decide  upon  the 
fate  of  that  man,  with  the  intervention  of  a  court.  If  he  had  the  right, 
he  waived  it,  and  having  violated  the  sentence  of  the  court,  there  was 
brought  upon  the  judicial  administration  of  the  army  a  reproach,  which 
must  occasion  the  most  lasting  regret. 

However  guilty  these  men  were,  they  should  not  have  been  condemned 
or  executed  without  the  authority  of  the  law.  I  will  not  dwell,  at  this 
time,  on  the  effect  of  these  precedents  in  foreign  countries  ;  but  I  shall  not 
pass  unnoticed  their  dangerous  influence  in  our  own  country.  Bad  exam- 
ples are  generally  set  in  the  cases  of  bad  men,  and  often  remote  from  the 
central  government.  It  was  in  the  provinces  that  were  laid  the  abuses  and 
the  seeds  of  the  ambitious  projects  which  overturned  the  liberties  of  Rome. 
I  beseech  the  committee  not  to  be  so  captivated  with  the  charms  of  elo- 
quence, and  the  appeals  made  to  our  passions  and  our  sympathies,  as  to 
forget  the  fundamental  principles  of  our  government.  The  influence  of  a 
bad  example  will  often  be  felt,  when  its  authors  and  all  the  circumstances 
connected  with  it  are  no  longer  remembered.  I  know  of  but  one  anal- 
ogous instance  of  the  execution  of  a  prisoner,  and  that  has  brought  more 
odium  than  almost  any  other  incident  on  the  unhappy  Emperor  of  France. 
I  allude  to  the  instance  of  the  execution  of  the  unfortunate  member  of  the 
Bourbon  house.  He  sought  an  asylum  in  the  territories  of  Baden.  Bo- 
naparte dispatched  a  corps  of  gen-d'armes  to  the  place  of  his  retreat,  seized 
him,  and  brought  him  to  the  dungeons  of  Vincennes.  He  was  there  tried 
by  a  court-martial,  condemned,  and  shot.  There,  as  here,  was  a  violation 
of  neutral  territory  ;  there,  the  neutral  ground  was  not  stained  with  the 
blood  of  him  whom  it  should  have  protected.  And  there  is  another  most 
unfortunate  difference  for  the  American  people.  The  Duke  d'Enghein  was 
executed  according  to  his  sentence.     It  is  said  by  the  defenders  of  Napo- 


ON  THE   SEMINOLE.  WAR.  197 

leon,  that  the  duke  had  been  machinating  not  merely  to  overturn  the 
French  government,  but  against  the  life  of  its  cbief.  If  that  were  true, 
he  might,  if  taken  in  France,  have  been  legally  executed.  Such  was  the 
odium  brought  upon  the  instruments  of  this  transaction,  that  those  persons 
who  have  been  even  suspected  of  participation  in  it,  have  sought  to  vin- 
dicate themselves  from  what  they  appeared  to  have  considered  as  an  asper- 
sion, before  foreign  courts.  In  conclusion  of  this  part  of  my  subject,  I 
most  cheerfully  and  entirely  acquit  General  Jackson  of  any  intention  to 
violate  the  laws  of  the  country,  or  the  obligations  of  humanity.  I  am  per- 
suaded, from  all  that  I  have  heard,  that  he  considered  himself  as  equally 
respecting  and  observing  both.  With  respect  to  the  purity  of  his  intentions, 
therefore,  I  am  disposed  to  allow  it  in  the  most  extensive  degree.  Of  his 
acts,  it  is  my  duty  to  speak,  with  the  freedom  which  belongs  to  my  station. 
And  I  shall  now  proceed  to  consider  some  of  them,  of  the  most  moment- 
ous character,  as  it  regards  the  distribution  of,  the  powers  of  government. 

Of  all  the  powers  conferred  by  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States, 
not  one  is  more  expressly  and  exclusively  granted,  than  that  which  gives 
to  Congress  the  power  to  declare  war.  The  immortal  Convention  who 
formed  that  instrument,  had  abundant  reason,  drawn  from  every  page  of 
history,  for  confiding  this  tremendous  power  to  the  deliberate  judgment  of 
the  representatives  of  the  people.  It  was  there  seen,  that  nations  are  often 
precipitated  into  ruinous  war,  from  folly,  from  pride,  from  ambition,  and 
from  the  desire  of  military  fame.  It  was  believed,  no  doubt,  in  committing 
this  great  subject  to  the  Legislature  of  the  Union,  we  should  be  safe  from 
the  mad  wars  that  have  afflicted,  and  desolated,  and  ruined  other  countries. 
It  was  supposed,  that  before  any  war  was  declared,  the  nature  of  the  injury 
complained  of,  would  be  carefully  examined,  and  the  power  and  resources 
of  the  enemy  estimated,  and  the  power  and  resources  of  our  own  country, 
as  well  as  the  probable  issue  and  consequences  of  the  war.  It  was  to  guard 
our  country  against  precisely  that  species  of  rashness  which  has  been 
manifested  in  Florida,  that  the  Constitution  was  so  framed.  If,  then,  this 
power,  thus  cautiously  and  clearly  bestowed  upon  Congress,  has  been  as- 
sumed and  exercised  by  any  other  functionary  of  the  government,  it  is 
cause  of  serious  alarm,  and  it  becomes  this  body  to  vindicate  and  maintain 
its  authority  by  all  the  means  in  its  power ;  and  yet  there  are  some  gen- 
tlemen, who  would  have  us  not  merely  to  yield  a  tame  and  silent  acquies- 
cence in  the  encroachment,  but  even  to  pass  a  vote  of  thanks  to  the 
author. 

On  the  25th  of  March,  1818,  the  President  of  the  United  States  com- 
municated a  message  to  Congress  in  relation  to  the  Seminole  war,  in 
which  he  declared,  that  although,  in  the  prosecution  of  it,  orders  had  been 
given  to  pass  into  the  Spanish  territory,  they  were  so  guarded  as  that  the 
local  authorities  of  Spain  should  be  respected.  How  respected  ?  The 
president,  by  the  documents  accompanying  the  message,  the  orders  them- 
selves which  issued  from  the  Department  of  War  to  the  commanding  gen- 


198  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY   CLAY. 

eral,  had  assured  the  Legislature  that,  even  if  the  enemy  should  take 
shelter  under  a  Spanish  fortress,  the  fortress  was  not  to  be  attacked,  but 
the  fact  to  be  reported  to  that  department  for  further  orders.     Congress 
saw,  therefore,  that  there  was  no  danger  of  violating  the  existing  peace. 
And  yet  on  the  same  25th  day  of  March   (a  most  singular  concurrence 
of  dates),  when   the  representatives  of  the  people  received  this  solemn 
message,  announced  in  the  presence  of  the  nation  and  in  the  face  of  the 
world,  and  in  the  midst  of  a  friendly  negotiation  with  Spain,  does  General 
Jackson  write  from  his  head-quarters,  that  he  shall  take  St.  Marks  as  a  nec- 
essary depot  for  his  military  operations  !     The  general  states,  in  his  let- 
ter, what  he  had  heard  about  the  threat  on  the  part  of  the  Indians  and 
negroes,  to  occupy  the  fort,  and  declares  his  purpose  to  possess  himself  of 
it,  in  either  of  the  two  contingencies,  of  its  being  in  their  hands,  or  in  the 
hands  of  the  Spaniards.     He  assumed  a  right  to  judge  what  Spain  was 
bound  to  do  by  her  treaty,  and  judged  very  correctly ;  but  then  he  also 
assumed  the  power,  belonging  to   Congress  alone,  of  determining  what 
should  be  the  effect  and  consequence  of  her  breach  of  engagement.     Gen- 
eral Jackson  generally  performs  what  he  intimates  his  intention  to  do. 
Accordingly,  finding  St.  Marks  yet  in  the  hands  of  the  Spaniards,  he  seized 
and  occupied  it.     Was  ever,  I  ask,  the  just  confidence  of  the  legislative 
body,  in  the  assurances  of  the  chief  magistrate,  more  abused  ?     The  Span- 
ish commander  intimated  his  wiUinffness  that  the  American  armv  should 
take  post  near  him,  until  he  could  have  instructions  from  his  superior  offi- 
cer, and  promised  to  maintain,  in  the  mean  time,  the  most  friendly  rela- 
tions.    No !     St.  Marks  was  a   convenient  post  for  the  American  army, 
and  delay  was  inadmissible.     I  have  always  understood   that  the  Indians 
but  rarely  take  or  defend  fortresses,  because  they  are  unskilled  in  the  modes 
of  attack  and  defense.     The  threat,  therefore,  on  their  part,  to  seize  on 
St.  Marks,  must  have  been  empty,  and  would  probably  have  been  impos- 
sible.    At  all  events,  when  General  Jackson  arrived  there,  no  danger  any 
longer  threatened  the  Spaniards,  from  the  miserable  fugitive  Indians,  who 
fled  on  all  sides,  upon  his  approach.     And,  sir,  upon  what  plea  is  this  vio- 
lation of  orders,  and  this  act  of  war  upon  a  foreign  power,  attempted  to 
be  justified  ?     Upon  the  grounds  of  the  conveniency  of  the  depot  and  the 
Indian  threat.     The  first  I  will  not  seriously  examine  and  expose.     If  the 
Spanish  character  of  the  fort  had  been  totally  merged  in  the  Indian  char- 
acter, it  might  have  been  justifiable  to  seize  it.     But  that  was  not  the 
fact ;  and  the  bare  possibility  of  its  being  forcibly  taken  by  the  Indians, 
could  not  justify  our  anticipating  their  blow.     Of  all  the  odious  transac- 
tions which  occurred  during  the  late  war  between  France   and  England, 
none  was  more   condemned   in  Europe   and  in  this  country,   than   her 
seizure  of  the  fleet  of  Denmark,  at   Copenhagen.     And  I  lament  to  be 
obliged  to  notice  the  analogy  which  exists  in  the  defenses  made  of  the  two 


cases 


If  my  recollection  does  not  deceive  me,  Bonaparte  had  passed  the  Rhine 


ON    THE    SEMINOLE    WAR.  199 

and  the  Alps,  had  conquered  Italy,  the  Netherlands,  Holland,  Hanover, 
Lubec,  and  Hamburg,  and  extended  his  empire  as  far  as  Altona,  on  the 
Bide  of  Denmark.  A  few  days'  march  would  have  carried  him  through 
Holstein,  over  the  two  Belts,  through  Funen,  and  into  the  island  of  Zeal- 
and. "What  then  was  the  conduct  of  England  \  It  was  my  lot  to  fall  ink) 
conversation  with  an  intelligent  Englishman  on  this  subject.  "  We  knew 
(said  he)  that  we  were  fighting  for  our  existence.  It  was  absolutely  nec- 
essarv  that  we  should  preserve  the  command  of  the  seas.  If  the  fleet  of 
Denmark  fell  into  the  enemy's  hands,  combined  with  his  other  fleets,  that 
command  might  be  rendered  doubtful.  Denmark  had  only  a  nominal  in- 
dependence. She  was,  in  truth,  subject  to  his  sway.  "We  said  to  her,  Give 
us  your  fleet ;  it  will  otherwise  be  taken  possession  of  by  your  secret  and 
our  open  enemy.  We  will  preserve  it,  and  restore  it  to  you  whenever  the 
danger  shall  be  over.  Denmark  refused.  Copenhagen  was  bombarded^ 
gallantly  defended,  but  the  fleet  was  seized."  Everywhere  the  conduct  of 
England  was  censured ;  and  the  name  even  of  the  negotiator  who  was  em- 
ployed by  her,  who  was  subsequently  the  minister  near  this  government, 
was  scarcely  ever  pronounced  here  without  coupling  with  it  an  epithet 
indicating  his  participation  in  the  disgraceful  transaction.  And  yet  we  are 
going  to  sanction  acts  of  violence,  committed  by  ourselves,  which  but  too 
much  resemble  it !  What  an  important  difference,  too,  between  the  rela- 
tive condition  of  England  and  of  this  country !  She,  perhaps,  was  strug- 
gling for  her  existence.  She  was  combating,  single  handed,  the  most 
enormous  military  power  that  the  world  has  ever  known.  With  whom 
were  we  contending?  With  a  few  half-starved,  half-clothed,  wretched 
Indians,  and  fugitive  slaves.  And  while  carrying  on  this  inglorious  war, 
inglorious  as  it  regards  the  laurels  or  renown  won  in  it,  we  violate  neutral 
rights,  which  the  government  had  solemnly  pledged  itself  to  respect,  upon 
the  principle  of  convenience,  or  upon  the  light  presumption  that,  by  pos- 
sibility, a  post  might  be  taken  by  this  miserable  combination  of  Indians 
and  slaves. 

On  the  8th  of  April  the  general  writes  from  St.  Marks  that  he  shall 
march  for  the  Suwaney  river ;  the  destroying  of  the  establishments  on 
which  will,  in  his  opinion,  bring  the  war  to  a  close.  Accordingly,  having 
effected  that  object,  he  writes,  on  the  20th  of  April,  that  he  believes  he 
may  say  that  the  war  is  at  an  end  for  the  present.  He  repeats  the  same 
opinion  in  his  letter  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  written  six  days  after.  The 
war  being  thus  ended,  it  might  have  been  hoped  that  no  further  hostilities 
would  be  committed.  But  on  the  23d  of  May,  on  his  way  home,  he  re- 
ceives a  letter  from  the  commandant  of  Pensacola,  intimating  his  surprise 
at  the  invasion  of  the  Spanish  territory,  and  the  acts  of  hostility  performed 
by  the  American  army,  and  his  determination,  if  persisted  in,  to  employ 
force  to  repel  them.  Let  us  pause  and  examine  the  proceeding  of  the  gov- 
ernor, so  very  hostile  and  affrontive  in  the  view  of  General  Jackson.  Rec- 
ollect that  he  was  governor  of  Florida ;  that  he  had  received  no  orders 


200  SPEECHES   OF   HENKT    CLAY. 

from  Ill's  superiors  to  allow  a  passage  to  the  American  army  ;  that  he  had 
heard  of  the  reduction  of  St.  Marks ;  and  that  General  Jackson,  at  the 
head  of  his  army,  was  approaching  in  the  direction  of  Peusacola.  He  had 
seen  the  president's  message  of  the  25th  of  March,  and  reminded  General 
Jackson  of  it,  to  satisfy  him  that  the  American  government  could  not  have 
authorized  all  those  measures.  I  can  not  read  the  allusion  made  by  the 
governor  to  that  message  without  feeling  that  the  charge  of  insincerity 
which  it  implied  had,  at  least,  but  too  much  the  appearance  of  truth  in  it. 
Could  the  governor  have  done  less  than  write  some  such  letter  ?  We  have 
only  to  reverse  situations,  and  suppose  him  to  have  been  an  American  gov- 
ernor. General  Jackson  says  that  when  he  received  that  letter  he  no 
longer  hesitated.  No,  sir,  he  did  no  longer  hesitate.  He  received  it  on 
the  23d,  he  was  in  Peusacola  on  the  24th,  aud  immediately  after  set  him- 
self before  the  fortress  of  San  Carlos  de  Barancas,  which  he  shortly  reduced. 
Veni,  vidi,  vici.  Wonderful  energy!  Admirable  promptitude!  Alas! 
that  it  had  not  been  an  energy  and  a  promptitude  within  the  pale  of  the 
Constitution,  and  according  to  the  orders  of  the  chief  magistrate.  It  is 
impossible  to  give  any  definition  of  war  that  would  not  comprehend  these 
acts.     It  was  open,  undisguised,  and  unauthorized  hostility 

The  honorable  gentleman  from  Massachusetts  has  endeavored  to  derive 
some  authority  to  General  Jackson  from  the  message  of  the  president, 
and  the  letter  of  the  Secretary  of  War  to  Governor  Bibb.  The  message 
declares  that  the  Spanish  authorities  are  to  be  respected  wherever  main- 
tained. What  the  president  means  by  their  beiug  maintained  is  exj>lained 
in  the  orders  themselves,  by  the  extreme  case  being  put  of  the  enemy  seek- 
ing shelter  under  a  Spanish  fort.  If  even  in  that  case  he  was  not  to  at- 
tack, certainly  he  was  not  to  attack  in  any  case  of  less  strength.  The 
letter  to  Governor  Bibb  admits  of  a  similar  explanation.  When  the 
secretaiy  says,  in  that  letter,  that  General  Jackson  is  fully  empowered  to 
bring  the  Seminole  war  to  a  conclusion,  he  means  that  he  is  so  empowered 
by  his  orders,  which,  being  now  before  us,  must  speak  for  themselves.  It 
does  not  appear  that  General  Jackson  ever  saw  that  letter,  which  was 
dated  at  this  place  after  the  capture  of  St.  Marks.  I  will  take  a  moment- 
ary glance  at  the  orders. 

On  the  2d  of  December,  1817,  General  Gaines  was  forbidden  to 
cross  the  Florida  line.  Seven  days  after,  the  Secretary  of  War  having  ar- 
rived here,  and  infused  a  little  more  energy  into  our  councils,  he  was 
authorized  to  iise  a  sound  discretion  in  crossing  or  not.  On  the  16th, 
he  was  instructed  again  to  consider  himself  at  liberty  to  cross  the  line,  aud 
pursue  the  enemy ;  but,  if  he  took  refuge  under  a  Spanish  fortress,  the 
fact  was  to  be  reported  to  the  Department  of  War.  These  orders  were 
transmitted  to  General  Jackson,  and  constituted,  or  ought  to  have  consti- 
tuted, his  guide.  There  was  then  no  justification  for  the  occupation  of 
Pensacola,  aud  the  attack  on  the  Barancas,  in  the  message  of  the  president, 
the  letter  to  Governor  Bibb,  or  in  the  orders  themselves.     The  gentleman 


ON    THE    SEMINOLE   WAR.  201 

from  Massachusetts  will  pardon  me  for  saying,  that  he  has  undertaken 
what  even  his  talents  are  not  competent  to — the  maintenance  of  directly 
contradictory  propositions,  that  it  was  right  in  General  Jackson  to  take 
Pensacola,  and  wrong  in  the  president  to  keep  it.  The  gentleman  has 
made  a  greater  mistake  than  he  supposes  General  Jackson  to  have  done  in 
attacking  Pensacola  for  an  Indian  town,  by  attempting  the  defense  both  of 
the  president  and  General  Jackson.  If  it  were  right  in  him  to  seize  the 
place,  it  is  impossible  that  it  should  have  been  right  in  the  president  im- 
mediately to  surrender  it.  We,  sir,  are  the  supporters  of  the  president. 
We  regret  that  we  can  not  support  General  Jackson  also.  The  gentle- 
man's liberality  is  more  comprehensive  than  ours.  I  approve  with  all  my 
heart  of  the  restoration  of  Pensacola.  I  think  St.  Marks  ought,  perhaps, 
to  have  been  also  restored;  but  I  say  this  with  doubt  and  diffidence.  That 
the  president  thought  the  seizure  of  the  Spanish  posts  was  an  act  of  war, 
is  manifest  from  his  opening  message,  in  which  he  says  that,  to  have  re- 
tained them,  would  have  changed  our  relations  with  Spain,  to  do  which 
the  power  of  the  executive  was  incompetent,  Congress  alone  possessing  it. 
The  president  has,  in  this  instance,  deserved  well  of  his  country,  lie  has 
taken  the  only  course  which  he  could  have  pursued,  consistent  with  the 
Constitution  of  the  land.  And  I  defy  the  gentleman  to  make  good  both 
his  positions,  that  the  general  was  right  in  taking,  and  the  president  right 
in  giving  up,  the  posts. 

[Mr.  Holmes  explained.] 

The  gentleman  from  Massachusetts  is  truly  unfortunate ;  fact  or  prin- 
ciple is  always  against  him.  The  Spanish  posts  were  not  in  the  possession 
of  the  enemy.  One  old  Indian  only  was  found  in  the  Barancas,  none  in 
Pensacola,  none  in  St.  Marks.  There  was  not  even  the  color  of  a  threat  of 
Indian  occupation  as  it  regards  Pensacola  and  the  Barancas.  Pensacola 
was  to  be  restored  unconditionally,  and  might,  therefore,  immediately  have 
come  into  the  possession  of  the  Indians,  if  they  had  the  power  and  the  will 
to  take  it.  The  gentleman  is  in  a  dilemma  from  which  there  is  no  escape. 
He  gave  up  General  Jackson  when  he  supported  the  president,  and  gave 
up  the  president  when  he  supported  General  Jackson.  I  rejoice  to  have 
seen  the  president  manifesting,  by  the  restoration  of  Pensacola,  his  devoted- 
ness  to  the  Constitution.  When  the  whole  country  was  ringing  with 
plaudits  for  its  capture,  I  said,  and  I  said  alone,  in  the  limited  circle  in 
which  I  moved,  that  the  president  must  surrender  it ;  that  he  could  not 
hold  it.  It  is  not  my  intention  to  inquire,  whether  the  army  was  or  was 
not  constitutionally  marched  into  Florida.  It  is  not  a  clear  question,  and 
I  am  iuclined  to  think  that  the  express  authority  of  Congress  ought  to 
have  been  asked.  The  gentleman  from  Massachusetts  will  allow  me  to  re- 
fer to  a  part  of  the  correspondence  at  Ghent  different  from  that  which  he 
has  quoted.  He  will  find  the  condition  of  the  Indians  there  accurately 
defined.     And  it  is  widely  variant  from  the  gentleman's  ideas  on  this  sub- 


202  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

ject.  The  Indians,  inhabiting  the  United  States,  according  to  the  state- 
ment of  the  American  commissioners  at  Ghent,  have  a  qualified  sovereignty 
only,  the  supreme  sovereignty  residing  in  the  government  of  the  United 
Stales.  They  live  under  their  own  laws  and  customs,  may  inhabit  and 
hunt  their  lands;  but  acknowledge  the  protection  of  the  United  States, 
and  have  no  right  to  sell  their  lands  but  to  the  government  of  the  United 
States.  Foreign  powers  or  foreign  subjects  have  no  right  to  maintain  any 
intercourse  with  them,  without  our  permission.  They  are  not,  therefore, 
independent  nations,  as  the  gentleman  supposes.  Maintaining  the  relation 
described  with  them,  we  must  allow  a  similar  relation  to  exist  between 
Spain  and  the  Indians  residing  within  her  dominions.  She  must  be,  there- 
fore regarded  as  the  sovereign  of  Florida,  and  we  are,  accordingly,  treating 
with  her  for  the  purchase  of  it.  In  strictness,  then,  we  ought  first  to  have 
demanded  of  her  to  restrain  the  Iudians,  and,  that  failing,  we  should  have 
demanded  a  right  of  passage  for  our  army.  But,  if  the  president  had  the 
power  to  inarch  an  army  into  Florida,  without  consulting  Spain,  and  with- 
out the  authority  of  Congress,  he  had  no  power  to  authorize  any  act  of 
hostility  against  her.  If  the  gentleman  had  eveu  succeeded  in  showing 
that  an  authority  was  conveyed  by  the  executive  to  General  Jackson  to 
take  the  Spanish  posts,  he  would  only  have  established  that  unconstitu- 
tional orders  had  been  given,  and  thereby  transferred  the  disapprobation 
from  the  military  officer  to  the  executive.  But  no  such  orders  were,  in 
truth,  given.  The  president  acted  in  conformity  to  the  Constitution,  when 
he  forbade  the  attack  of  a  Spanish  fort,  and  when,  in  the  same  spirit,  he 
surrendered  the  posts  themselves. 

I  will  not  trespass  much  longer  upon  the  time  of  the  committee ;  but  I 
trust  I  shall  be  indulged  with,  some  few  reflections  upon  the  danger  of  per- 
mitting the  conduct  on  which  it  has  been  my  painful  duty  to  animadvert, 
to  pass  without  a  solemn  expression  of  the  disapprobation  of  this  House. 
Recall  to  your  recollection  the  free  nations  which  have  gone  before  us. 
Where  are  they  now  ? 

Gone  glimmering  through  the  dream  of  things  that  were, 
A  school-boy's  tale,  the  wonder  of  an  hour." 

And  how  have  they  lost  their  liberties  ?  If  wre  could  transport  ourselves 
back  to  the  ages  when  Greece  and  Rome  flourished  in  their  greatest  pros- 
perity, and  mingling  in  the  throng,  should  ask  a  Grecian  if  he  did  not  fear 
that  some  daring  military  chieftain,  covered  with  glory,  some  Philip  or 
Alexander,  would  one  day  overthrow  the  liberties  of  his  country,  the  con- 
fident and  indignant  Grecian  would  exclaim,  No  !  no  !  we  have  nothing  to 
fear  from  our  heroes ;  our  liberties  will  be  eternal.  If  a  Roman  citizen 
had  been  asked,  if  he  did  not  fear  that  the  conqueror  of  Gaul  might  estab- 
lish a  throne  upon  the  ruins  of  public  liberty,  he  would  have  instantly  re- 
pelled the  unjust  insinuation.  Yet  Greece  fell ;  Caesar  passed  the  Rubicon, 
and  the  patriotic  arm  even  of  Brutus  could  not  preserve  the  liberties  of  his 


ON   THE    SEMINOLE   WAR.  203 

devoted  country !  The  celebrated  Madame  de  Stael,  in  her  last  and  per- 
haps her  best  work,  has  said,  that  in  the  very  year,  almost  the  very  month, 
when  the  president  of  the  directory  declared  that  monarchy  would  never 
more  show  its  frightful  head  in  France,  Bonaparte,  with  his  grenadiers,  en- 
tered the  palace  of  St.  Cloud,  and  dispersing,  with  the  bayonet,  the  depu- 
ties of  the  people,  deliberating  on  the  affairs  of  the  state,  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  that  vast  fabric  of  despotism  which  overshadowed  all  Europe.  I 
hope  not  to  be  misunderstood ;  I  am  far  from  intimating  that  General 
Jackson  cherishes  any  designs  inimical  to  the  liberties  of  the  country.  I 
believe  his  intentions  to  be  pure  and  patriotic.  I  thank  God  that  he  would 
not,  but  I  thank  him  still  more  that  he  could  not  if  he  would,  overturn  the 
liberties  of  the  Republic.  But  precedents,  if  bad,  are  fraught  with  the  most 
dangerous  consequences.  Man  has  been  described,  by  some  of  those  who 
have  treated  of  his  nature,  as  a  bundle  of  habits.  The  definition  is  much 
truer  when  applied  to  governments.  Precedents  are  their  habits.  There 
is  one  important  difference  between  the  formation  of  habits  by  an  individ- 
ual and  by  governments.  He  contracts  it  only  after  frequent  repetition. 
A  single  instance  fixes  the  habit  and  determines  the  direction  of  gov- 
ernments.  Against  the  alarming  doctrine  of  unlimited  discretion  in  our 
military  commanders  when  applied  even  to  prisoners  of  war,  I  must  enter 
my  protest.  It  begins  upon  them  ;  it  will  end  on  us.  I  hope  our  happy 
form  of  government  is  to  be  perpetual.  But,  if  it  is  to  be  preserved,  it  must 
be  by  the  practice  of  virtue,  by  justice,  by  moderation,  by  magnanimity,  by 
greatness  of  soul,  by  keeping  a  watchful  and  steady  eye  on  the  executive ; 
and,  above  all,  by  holding  to  a  strict  accountability  the  military  branch  of 
the  public  force. 

We  are  fighting  a  great  moral  battle,  for  the  benefit  not  only  of  our 
country,  but  of  all  mankind.  The  eyes  of  the  whole  world  are  in  fixed  at- 
tention upon  us.  One,  and  the  largest  portion  of  it,  is  gazing  with  con- 
tempt, with  jealousy,  and  with  envy ;  the  other  portion,  with  hope,  with 
confidence,  and  with  affection.  Everywhere  the  black  cloud  of  legitimacy 
is  suspended  over  the  world,  save  only  one  bright  spot,  which  breaks  out 
from  the  political  hemisphere  of  the  west,  to  enlighten,  and  animate,  and 
gladden  the  human  heart.  Obscure  that,  by  the  downfall  of  liberty  here, 
and  all  mankind  are  enshrouded  in  a  pall  of  universal  darkness.  To  you, 
Mr.  Chairman,  belongs  the  high  privilege  of  transmitting,  unimpaired,  to 
posterity,  the  fair  character  and  liberty  of  our  country.  Do  you  expect  to 
execute  this  high  trust,  by  trampling  or  suffering  to  be  trampled  down,  law, 
justice,  the  Constitution,  and  the  rights  of  the  people  ?  by  exhibiting  exam- 
ples of  inhumanity,  and  cruelty,  and  ambition?  When  the  minions  of 
despotism  heard,  in  Europe,  of  the  seizure  of  Pensacola,  how  did  they 
chuckle,  and  chide  the  admirers  of  our  institutions,  tauntingly  pointing  to 
the  demonstration  of  a  spirit  of  injustice  and  aggrandizement  made  by  our 
country,  in  the  midst  of  an  amicable  negotiation !  Behold,  said  they,  the 
conduct  of  those  who  are  constantly  reproaching  kings !     You  saw  how 


204  SPEECHES    OF    HENKY    CLAY. 

those  admirers  were  astounded  and  hung  their  heads.  You  saw,  too,  when 
that  illustrious  man,  who  presides  over  us,  adopted  his  pacific,  moderate, 
and  just  course,  how  they  once  more  lifted  up  their  heads  with  exultation 
aud  delio-ht  beaming  in  their  countenances.  And  you  saw  how  those  min- 
ions  themselves  were  finally  compelled  to  unite  in  the  general  praises  be- 
stowed upon  our  government.  Beware  how  you  forfeit  this  exalted  charac- 
ter. Beware  how  you  give  a  fatal  sanction,  in  this  infant  period  of  our 
republic,  scarcely  yet  two-scorey  ears  old,  to  military  insubordination. 
Remember  that  Greece  had  her  Alexander,  Rome  her  Caesar,  England 
her  Cromwell,  France  her  Bonaparte,  and  that  if  we  would  escape  the 
rock,  ou  which  they  split,  we  must  avoid  their  errors. 

How  different  has  been  the  treatment  of  General  Jackson,  and  that 
modest,  but  heroic  young  man,  a  native  of  one  of  the  smallest  States  in  the 
Union,  who  achieved  for  his  country,  on  lake  Erie,  one  of  the  most  glorious 
victories  of  the  late  war.  In  a  moment  of  passion,  he  forgot  himself,  and 
offered  an  act  of  violence  which  was  repented  of  as  soon  as  perpetrated. 
He  was  tried,  and  suffered  the  judgment  to  be  pronounced  by  his  peers. 
Public  justice  was  thought  not  even  then  to  be  satisfied.  The  press  and 
Congress  took  up  the  subject.  My  honorable  friend  from  Virginia  (Mr. 
Johnson),  the  faithful  and  consistent  sentinel  of  the  law  and  of  the  Consti- 
tution, disapproved  in  that  instance,  as  he  does  in  this,  and  moved  an  in- 
quiry. The  public  mind  remained  agitated  aud  unappeased,  until  the 
recent  atonement  so  honorably  made  by  the  gallant  commodore.  And  is 
there  to  be  a  distinction  between  the  officers  of  the  two  branches  of  the 
public  service  ?  Are  former  services,  however  eminent,  to  preclude  even 
inquiry  into  recent  misconduct  ?  Is  there  to  be  no  limit,  no  prudential 
bounds  to  the  national  gratitude  ?  I  am  not  disposed  to  censure  the  presi- 
dent for  not  ordering  a  court  of  inquiry,  or  a  general  court-martial.  Per- 
haps, impelled  by  a  sense  of  gratitude,  he  determined,  by  anticipation,  to 
extend  to  the  general  that  pardon  which  he  had  the  undoubted  right  to 
grant  after  sentence.  Let  us  not  shrink  from  our  duty.  Let  us  assert  our 
constitutional  powers,  and  vindicate  the  instrument  from  military  viola- 
tion. 

I  hope  gentlemen  will  deliberately  survey  the  awful  isthmus  on  which 
we  stand.  They  may  bear  down  all  opposition  ;  they  may  even  vote  the 
general  the  public  thanks ;  they  may  carry  him  triumphantly  through  this 
House.  But,  if  they  do,  in  my  humble  judgment,  it  will  be  a  triumph  of 
the  principle  of  insubordination,  a  triumph  of  the  military  over  the  civil 
authority,  a  triumph  over  the  powers  of  this  House,  a  triumph  over  the 
Constitution  of  the  land.  And  I  pray  most  devoutly  to  Heaven,  that  it 
may  not  prove,  in  its  ultimate  effects  and  consequences,  a  triumph  over  the 
liberties  of  the  people. 


ON    THE    SPANISH    TREATY. 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES,  APRIL  3,  1820. 

[In  a  historical  point  of  view,  the  following  speech  is  chiefly 
interesting,  as  it  shows  contingently  what  would  have  "been  the 
political  results  to  the  United  States,  in  regard  to  Texas,  if  Mr. 
Clay's  advice  at  this  time,  as  set  forth  and  advocated  in  this 
speech,  had  prevailed.  The  United  States  then  owned  the 
whole  of  Texas  to  the  Rio  Grande,  or  Rio  del  Norte.  In  the 
Spanish  treaty  negotiated  by  Mr.  Monroe,  in  1819,  and  ratified 
in  1820,  the  considerations  given  by  the  United  States  for  Flor- 
ida were,  first,  Texas  ;  next,  five  millions  of  dollars  ;  thirdly, 
our  claims  on  Spain,  some  fifteen  millions  ;  and  fourthly,  about 
a  million  of  acres  of  unseated  lands  in  Louisiana,  rated  by  Mr. 
Clay  at  ten  dollars  an  acre — ten  millions.  The  third  and  fourth 
considerations  were  contingent,  but  nevertheless,  as  Mr.  Clay 
thought,  worthy  of  a  reckoning  in  the  account.  But  the  first 
and  second  alone  were  enormous,  as  compared  with  the  price 
paid  to  France  for  Louisiana.  Texas  was  an  immense  territory, 
and  of  great  prospective,  though  of  contingent,  value.  Politi- 
cally, it  might  be  invaluable,  and  it  has  proved  so  ;  for,  as  a 
possession  of  the  United  States,  if  it  had  been  retained,  its  po- 
litical history  would  have  been  very  different,  and  all  the  cost  of 
annexing  Texas,  as  a  foreign  State,  and  the  war  with  Mexico, 
would  have  been  saved.  Florida,  as  Mr.  Clay  showed,  was 
doomed  to  fall  into  our  lap,  and  nothing  would  be  lost  by 
waiting  a  little  longer.  Here  is  another  striking  instance  of  Mr. 
Clay's  far-seeing  political  sagacity.  From  twenty  to  thirty 
millions  for  Florida,  and  throw  into  the  bargain  the  vast  territory 
of  Texas  !  Was  there  ever  such  a  folly  ?  In  Mr.  Clay's  Ra- 
leigh Letter,  of  April  17,  1844,  he  says  :  "  When  the  treaty  was 
laid  before  the  House  of  Representatives,  being  a  member  of 
that  body,  I  expressed  the  opinion  which  I  then  entertained, 
and  still  hold,  that  Texas  was  sacrificed  to  the  acquisition  of 
Florida."* 

*  Last  Seven  Years  of  Henry  Clay,  p.  26. 


206  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

The  speech  of  Mr.  Clay  on  this  occasion  was  in  support  of 
two  resolutions  offered  by  himself,  as  follows  :] 

First,  resolved,  that  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  vests  in  Con- 
gress the  power  to  dispose  of  the  territory  belonging  to  them  ;  and  that 
no  treaty,  purporting  to  alienate  any  portion  thereof,  is  valid  without  the 
concurrence  of  Congress : 

Second,  resolved,  that  the  equivalent  proposed  to  he  given  by  Spain 
to  the  United  States  in  the  treaty  concluded  between  them,  on  the  22d 
of  February,  1819,  for  that  part  of  Louisiana  lying  west  of  the  Sabine, 
was  inadequate  ;  and  that  it  would  be  inexpedient  to  make  a  transfer 
thereof  to  any  foreign  power,  or  to  renew  the  aforesaid  treaty  : 

Mr.  Clay  said,  that,  while  he  felt  very  grateful  to  the  House  for  the 
prompt  and  respectful  manner  in  which  they  had  allowed  him  to  enter  upon 
the  discussion  of  the  resolutions  which  he  had  the  honor  of  submitting  to 
their  notice,  he  must  at  the  same  time  frankly  say,  that  he  thought  their 
character  and  consideration,  in  the  councils  of  this  country,  were  concerned 
in  not  letting  the  present  session  pass  off  without  deliberating  upon  our 
affairs  with  Spain.  In  coming  to  the  present  session'  of  Congress,  it  had 
been  his  anxious  wish  to  be  able  to  concur  with  the  executive  branch  of 
the  government  in  the  measures  which  it  might  conceive  itself  called  upon 
to  recommend  on  that  subject,  for  two  reasons,  of  which  the  first,  relating 
personally  to  himself,  he  would  not  trouble  the  committee  with  further  no- 
ticing. The  other  was,  that  it  appeared  to  him  to  be  always  desirable,  in 
respect  to  the  foreign  action  of  this  government,  that  there  should  be  a 
perfect  coincidence  in  opinion  between  its  several  co-ordinate  branches.  In 
time  of  peace,  however,  it  might  be  allowable,  to  those  who  are  charged 
with  the  public  interests,  to  entertain  and  express  their  respective  views, 
although  there  mio-ht  be  some  discordance  between  them.'  In  a  season  of 
war  there  should  be  no  division  in  the  public  councils ;  but  a  united  and 
vigorous  exertion  to  bring  the  war  to  an  honorable  conclusion.  For  his 
part,  whenever  that  calamity  may  befall  his  country,  he  would  entertain 
but  one  wish,  and  that  is,  that  success  might  crown  our  struggle,  and  th« 
war  be  honorably  and  gloriously  terminated.  He  would  never  refuse  to 
share  in  the  joys  incident  to  tbe  victory  of  our  arms,  nor  to  participate  in 
the  griefs  of  defeat  and  discomfiture.  He  conceded  entirely  in  the  senti- 
ment once  expressed  by  that  illustrious  hero,  whose  recent  melancholy 
fall  we  all  so  sincerely  deplore,  that  fortune  may  attend  our  country  in 
whatever  war  it  may  be  involved. 

There  are  two  systems  of  policy,  he  said,  of  which  our  goverment  had 
had  the  choice.  The  first  was,  by  appealing  to  the  justice  and  affections 
of  Spain,  to  employ  all  those  persuasives  which  could  arise  out  of  our 
abstinence  from  any  direct  countenance  to  the  cause  of  South  America, 
and  the  observance  of  a  strict  neutrality.  The  other  was,  by  appealing  to 
her  justice  also,  and  to  her  fears,  to  prevail  upon  her  to  redress  the  injuries 


ON    THE    SPANISH    TREATY.  207 

of  which  we  complain — her  fears  hy  a  recognition  of  the  independent 
governments  of  South  America,  and  leaving  her  in  a  state  of  uncertainly 
as  to  the  farther  step  we  might  take  in  respect  to  those  governments. 
The  unratified  treaty  was  the  result  of  the  first  system.  It  could  not  be 
positively  affirmed  what  effect  the  other  system  would  have  produced  ;  but 
he  verily  believed  that,  while  it  rendered  justice  to  those  governments, 
and  would  have  better  comported  with  that  magnanimous  policy  which 
ought  to  have  characterized  our  own,  it  would  have  more  successfully 
tended  to  an  amicable  and  satisfactory  arrangement  of  our  differences  with 
Spain. 

The  first  system  has  so  far  failed.  At  the  commencement  of  the  session, 
the  president  recommended  an  enforcement  of  the  provisions  of  the  treaty. 
After  three  months'  deliberation,  the  committee  of  foreign  affairs,  not  being 
able  to  concur  with  him,  has*  made  us  a  report,  recommending  the  seizure 
of  Florida  in  the  nature  of  a  reprisal.  Now  the  president  recommends  our 
postponement  of  the  subject  until  the  next  session.  It  had  been  his  inten- 
tion, whenever  the  committee  of  foreign  affairs  should  engage  the  House 
to  act  upon  their  bill,  to  offer,  as  a  substitute  for  it,  the  system  which  he 
thought  it  became  this  country  to  adopt,  of  which  the  occupation  of  Texas, 
as  our  own,  would  have  been  a  part,  and  the  recognition  of  the  independ- 
ent governments  of  South  America  another.  If  he  did  not  now  bring 
forward  this  system,  it  was  because  the  committee  proposed  to  withdraw 
their  bill,  and  because  he  knew  too  much  of  the  temper  of  the  House  and 
of  the  executive,  to  think  that  it  was  advisable  to  bring  it  forward.  He 
hoped  that  some  suitable  opportunity  might  occur  during  the  session,  for 
considering  the  propriety  of  recognizing  the  independent  governments  of 
South  America. 

Whatever  he  might  think  of  the  discretion  which  was  evinced  in  recom- 
mending the  postponement  of  the  bill  of  the  committee  of  foreign  relations, 
he  could  not  think  that  the  reasons,  assigned  by  the  president  for  that  recom- 
mendation, were  entitled  to  the  weight  which  he  had  given  them.  He 
thought  the  House  was  called  upon,  by  a  high  sense  of  duty,  seriously  to 
animadvert  upon  some  of  those  reasons.  He  believed  it  was  the  first 
example,  in  the  annals  of  the  country,  in  which  a  course  of  policy,  re- 
specting one  foreign  power,  which  we  must  suppose  had  been  deliberately 
considered,  has  been  recommended  to  be  abandoned,  in  a  domestic  com- 
munication from  one  to  another  co-ordinate  branch  of  the  government, 
upon  the  avowed  ground  of  the  interposition  of  foreign  powers.  And 
what  is  the  nature  of  this  interposition  ?  It  is  evinced  by  a  cargo  of 
scraps,  gathered  up  from  this  charge  d'affaires,  and  that ;  of  loose  conver- 
sations held  with  this  foreign  minister,  and  that — perhaps  mere  levee  con- 
versations, without  a  commitment  in  writing,  in  a  solitary  instance,  of  any 
of  the  foreign  parties  concerned,  except  only  in  the  case  of  his  imperial 
majesty ;  and  what  was  the  character  of  his  commitment  we  shall  presently 
see.     But  he  must  enter  his  solemn  protest  again  this  and  every  other 


208  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

species  of  foreign  interference  in  our  matters  with  Spain.  What  have 
they  to  do  with  them  ?  Would  they  not  repel  as  officious  and  insulting 
intrusion,  any  interference  on  our  part  in  their  concerns  with  foreign 
states  ?  Would  his  imperial  majesty  have  listened  with  complacency  to 
our  remonstrances  against  the  vast  acquisitions  which  he  has  recently 
made  ?  He  has  lately  crammed  his  enormous  maw  with  Finland,  and 
with  the  spoils  of  Poland,  and,  while  the  difficult  process  of  digestion  is 
going  on,  he  throws  himself  upon  a  couch,  and  cries  out,  Don't,  don't  dis- 
turb my  repose. 

He  charges  his  minister  here  to  plead  the  cause  of  peace  and  concord  ! 
The  American  "  government  is  too  enlightened"  (ah  !  sir,  how  sweet  this 
unction  is,  which  is  poured  down  our  backs),  to  take  hasty  steps.  And 
his  imperial  majesty's  minister  here  is  required  to  engage  (Mr.  Clay  said, 
he  hoped  the  original  expression  was  less  strong,  but  he  believed  the 
French  word  engager  bore  the  same  meaning),  "  the  American  govern- 
ment," etc.  "  Nevertheless,  the  emperor  does  not  interpose  iu  this  discus- 
sion." No  !  not  he.  He  makes  above  all  "  no  pretension  to  exercise  in- 
fluence in  the  councils  of  a  foreign  power."  Not  the  slightest.  And  yet, 
at  the  very  instant  when  he  is  protesting  against  the  imputation  of  this 
influence,  his  interposition  is  proving  effectual !  His  imperial  majesty  has 
at  least  manifested  so  far,  in  this  particular,  his  capacity  to  govern  his  em- 
pire by  the  selection  of  a  sagacious  minister.  For  if  Count  Nesselrode 
had  never  written  another  paragraph,  the  extract  from  his  dispatch  to  Mr. 
Poletica,  which  has  been  transmitted  to  this  House,  will  demonstrate  that 
^he  merited  the  confidence  of  his  master.  It  is  quite  refreshing  to  read 
such  state  papers,  after  perusing  those  (he  was  sorry  to  say  it,  he  wished 
there  was  a  vail  broad  and  thick  enough  to  conceal  them  forever),  which 
this  treaty  had  produced  on  the  part  of  our  government. 

Conversations  between  my  Lord  Castlereagh  and  our  minister  at  London 
had  also  been  communicated  to  this  House.  Nothing  from  the  hand  of 
his  lordship  is  produced — no ;  he  does  not  commit  himself  in  that  way. 
The  sense  in  which  our  minister  understood  him,  and  the  purport  of  cer- 
tain parts  of  dispatches  from  the  British  government  to  its  minister  at 
Madrid,  which  he  deigned  to  read  to  our  minister,  are  alone  communicated 
to  us.  Now  we  know  very  well  how  diplomatists,  when  it  is  their  j)leas- 
ure  to  do  so,  can  wrap  themselves  up  in  mystery.  No  man  more  than 
my  Lord  Castlereagh,  who  is  also  an  able  minister,  possessing  much  greater 
talents  than  are  allowed  to  him  generally  in  this  country,  can  successfully 
express  himself  in  ambiguous  language,  when  he  chooses  to  employ  it. 
He  recollected  himself  once  to  have  witnessed  this  facility,  on  the  part  of 
his  lordship.  The  case  was  this  :  When  Bonaparte  made  his  escape  from 
Elba,  and  invaded  France,  a  great  part  of  Europe  believed  it  was  with  the 
connivance  of  the  British  ministry.  The  opposition  charged  them,  in 
Parliament,  Avith  it,  and  they  were  interrogated,  to  know  what  measures 
of  precaution  they  had  taken  against  such  an  event.     Lord  Castlereagh 


ON   THE    SPANISH    TREATY.  209 

replied  by  staling  fbat  there  was  an  understanding  with  a  certain  naval 
officer  of  high  rank,  commanding  in  the  adjacent  seas,  that  he  was  to  act 
on  certain  contingences.  Now,  Mr.  Chairman,  if  you  can  make  any  thing 
intelligible  out  of  this  reply,  you  will  have  much  more  success  than  the 
English  opposition  bad. 

Tbe  allowance  of  interference  by  foreign  powers  in  the  affairs  of  our 
government,  not  pertaining  to  themselves,  is  against  the  counsels  of  all  our 
wisest  politicians — those  of  Washington,  Jefferson,  and  he  would  also  add 
those  of  the  present  chief  magistrate  ;  for,  pending  this  very  Spanish 
negotiation,  the  offer  of  the  mediation  of  foreign  states  was  declined,  upon 
the  true  ground,  that  Europe  had  her  system,  and  we  ours ;  and  that  it 
was  not  compatible  with  our  policy  to  entangle  ourselves  in  the  labyrinths 
of  hers.  But  a  mediation  is  far  preferable  to  the  species  of  interference 
on  which  it  had  been  his  reluctant  duty  to  comment.  The  mediator  is  a 
judge,  placed  on  high  ;  his  conscience  his  guide,  the  world  his  spectators, 
and  posterity  his  judge.  His  position  is  one,  therefore,  of  the  greatest 
responsibility.  But  what  responsibility  is  attached  to  this  sort  of  irregular, 
drawing-room,  intriguing  interposition  ?  He  could  see  no  motive  for 
governing  or  influencing  our  policy,  in  regard  to  Spain,  furnished  in  any 
of  the  communications  which  respected  the  disposition  of  foreign  powers. 
He  regretted,  for  his  part,  that  they  had  at  all  been  consulted.  There  was 
nothing  in  the  character  of  the  power  of  Spain,  nothing  in  the  beneficial 
nature  of  the  stipulations  of  the  treaty  to  us,  which  warranted  us  in  seek- 
ing the  aid  of  foreign  powers,  if  in  any  case  whatever  that  aid  wrere  desir- 
able. He  was  far  from  saying  that,  in  the  foreign  action  of  this  govern- 
ment, it  might  not  be  prudent  to  keep  a  watchful  eye  upon  the  probable 
conduct  of  foreign  powers.  That  might  be  a  material  circumstance  to  be 
taken  into  consideration.  But  he  never  would  avow  to  our  own  people, 
never  promulgate  to  foreign  powers,  that  their  wishes  and  interference 
were  the  controlling  cause  of  our  policy.  Such  promulgation  would  lead 
to  the  most  alarming  consequences.  It  was  to  invite  further  interposition. 
It  might,  in  process  of  time,  create  in  the  bosom  of  our  country  a  Russian 
faction,  a  British  faction,  a  French  faction.  Every  nation  ought  to  be 
jealous  of  this  species  of  interference,  whatever  was  its  form  of  govern- 
ment. But  of  all  forms  of  government,  the  united  testimony  of  all  history, 
admonished  a  republic  to  be  most  guarded  against  it.  From  the  moment 
Philip  intermeddled  with  the  affairs  of  Greece,  the  liberty  of  Greece  was 
doomed  to  inevitable  destruction. 

Suppose,  said  Mr.  Clay,  we  could  see  the  communications  which  have 
passed  between  his  imperial  majesty  and  the  British  government,  respect- 
ively ,  and  Spain,  in  regard  to  the  United  States ;  what  do  you  imagine 
would  be  their  character  ?  Do  you  suppose  the  same  language  has  been 
held  to  Spain  and  to  us  ?  Do  you  not,  on  the  contrary,  believe  that  senti- 
ments have  been  expressed  to  her,  consoling  to  her  pride  ?     That  we  have 

14 


210  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

been  represented,  perhaps,  as  an  ambitious  republic,  seeking  to  aggrandize 
ourselves  at  her  expense  ? 

In  the  other  ground  taken  by  the  president — the  present  distressed  con- 
dition of  Spain — for  his  recommendation  of  forbearance  to  act  during  the 
present  session,  he  was  also  sorry  to  say,  that  it  did  not  appear  to  him  to 
be  solid.  He  could  well  conceive,  how  the  weakness  of  your  aggressor 
might,  when  he  was  withholding  from  you  justice,  form  a  motive  for  your 
pressing  your  equitable  demands  upon  him  ;  but  he  could  not  accord  in 
the  wisdom  of  that  policy  which  would  wait  his  recovery  of  strength,  so 
as  to  enable  him  successfully  to  resist  those  demands.  Nor  would  it  com- 
port with  the  practice  of  our  government  heretofore.  Did  we  not,  in  1811, 
when  the -present  monarch  of  Spain  was  an  ignoble  captive,  and  the  people 
of  the  peninsula  were  contending  for  the  inestimable  privilege  of  self- 
government,  seize  and  occupy  that  part  of  Louisiana  which  is  situated  be- 
tween the  Mississippi  and  the  Perdido  ?  What  must  the  people  of  Spain 
think  of  that  policy  which  would  not  spare  them,  and  which  commiserates 
alone  an  unworthy  prince,  who  ignominiously  surrendered  himself  to  the 
enemy — a  vile  despot,  of  whom  I  can  not  speak  in  appropriate  language, 
without  departing  from  the  respect  due  to  this  House  or  to  myself?  What 
must  the  people  of  South  America  think  of  this  sympathy  for  Ferdinand, 
at  a  moment  when  they,  as  well  as  the  people  of  the  peninsula  themselves 
(if  we  are  to  believe  the  late  accounts,  and  God  send  that  they  may  be 
true),  are  struggling  for  liberty  ? 

Again :  when  we  declared  our  late  just  war  against  Great  Britain,  did  we 
wait  for  a  moment  when  she  was  free  from  embarrassment  or  distress;  or 
did  we  not  rather  wisely  select  a  period  when  there  was  the  greatest  prob- 
ability of  giving  success  to  our  arms  ?  What  was  the  complaint  in  E  n- 
gland ;  what  the  language  of  faction  here  ?  Was  it  not,  that  we  had  cruelly 
proclaimed  the  war  at  a  time  when  she  was  struggling  for  the  liberties  of 
the  world  ?  How  truly,  let  the  sequel  and  the  voice  of  impartial  history 
tell. 

While  he  could  not,  therefore,  persuade  himself,  that  the  reasons  assign- 
ed, by  the  president  for  postponing  the  subject  of  our  Spanish  affairs  until 
another  session,  were  entitled  to  all  the  weight  which  he  seemed  to  think 
belonged  to  them,  he  did  not,  nevertheless,  regret  that  the  particular  pro- 
ject recommended  by  the  committee  of  foreign  relations  was  thus  to  be 
disposed  of ;  for  it  was  war — war,  attempted  to  be  disguised.  And  if  we 
went  to  war,  he  thought  it  should  have  no  other  limit  than  indemnity  for 
the  past,  and  security  for  the  future.  He  had  no  idea  of  the  wisdom  of 
that  measure  of  hostility  which  would  bind  us,  while  the  other  party  is 
left  free. 

Before  he  proceeded  to  consider  the  particular  propositions  which  the 
resolutions  contained,  which  he  had  had  the  honor  of  submitting,  it  was 
material  to  determine  the  actual  posture  of  our  relations  to  Spain.  He 
considered  it  too  clear  to  need  discussion,  that  the  treaty  was  at  an  end ; 


ON   THE   SPANISH   TEEATY.  211 

that  it  contained,  in  its  present  state,  no  obligation  whatever  upon  us,  and 
no  obligation  whatever  on  the  part  of  Spain.  It  was,  as  if  it  had  never 
been.  We  are  remitted  back  to  the  state  of  our  rights  and  our  demands 
which  existed  prior  to  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty,  with  this  only  differ- 
ence, that,  instead  of  being  merged  in,  or  weakened  by  the  treaty,  they  had 
acquired  all  the  additional  force  which  the  intervening  time,  and  the  faith- 
lessness of  Spain,  can  communicate  to  them.  Standing  on  this  position, 
he  should  not  deem  it  necessary  to  interfere  with  the  treaty-making  power, 
if  a  fixed  and  persevering  purpose  had  not  been  indicated  by  it,  to  obtain 
the  revival  of  the  treaty.  Now  he  thought  it  a  bad  treaty.  The  interest 
of  the  country,  as  it  appeared  to  him,  forbade  its  renewal.  Being  gone,  it 
was  perfectly  incomprehensible  to  him,  why  so  much  solicitude  was  mani- 
fested to  restore  it.  Yet  it  is  clung  to  with  the  same  sort  of  frantic  affec- 
tion with  which  the  bereaved  mother  hugs  her  dead  infant,  in  the  vain  hope 
of  bringing  it  back  to  life. 

Has  the  House  of  Representatives  aright  to  express  its  opinion  upon  the 
arrangement  made  in  that  treaty  ?  The  president,  by  asking  Congress  to 
carry  it  into  effect,  has  given  us  jurisdiction  of  the  subject,  if  we  had  it  not 
before.  We  derive  from  that  circumstance  the  right  to  consider,  first,  if 
there  be  a  treaty ;  secondly,  if  we  ought  to  carry  it  into  effect ;  and,  thirdly, 
if  there  be  no  treaty,  whether  it  be  expedient  to  assert  our  rights,  inde- 
pendent of  the  treaty.  It  will  not  be  contended  that  we  are  restricted  to 
that  specific  mode  of  redress  which  the  president  intimated  in  his  opening 
message. 

The  first  resolution  which  he  had  presented,  asserted,  that  the  Constitu- 
tion vests  in  the  Congress  of  the  United  States  the  power  to  dispose  of  the 
territory  belonging  to  them  ;  and  that  no  treaty,  purporting  to  alienate  any 
portion  thereof,  is  valid,  without  the  concurrence  of  Congress.     It  was  far 
from  his  wish  to  renew  at  large  a  discussion  of  the  treaty-making  power. 
The  Constitution  of  the  United  States  had  not  defined  the  precise  limits  of 
that  power,  because,  from  the  nature  of  it,  they  could  not  be  prescribed. 
It  appeared  to  him,  however,  that  no  safe  American  statesman  would  as- 
sign to  it  a  boundless  scope.     He  presumed,  for  example,  that  it  would  not 
be  contended  that  in  a  government  which  was  itself  limited,  there  was  a 
functionary  without  limit.     The  first  great  bound  to  the  power  in  question, 
he  apprehended,  was,  that  no  treaty  could  constitutionally  transcend  the 
very  objects  and  purposes  of  the  government  itself.     He  thought,  also,  that 
wherever  there  were  specific  grants  of  powers  to  Congress,  they  limited 
and  controlled,  or,  he  would  rather  say,  modified  the  exercise  of  the  gen- 
eral grant  of  the  treaty-making  power,  upon  the  principle  which  was 
familiar  to  every  one.     He  did  not  insist,  that  the  treaty-making  power 
could  not  act  upon  the  subjects  committed  to  the  charge  of  Congress  ;  he 
merely  contended  that  the  concurrence  of  Congress,  in  its  action  upon  those 
subjects,  was  necessary.     Nor  would  he  insist,  that  the  concurrence  should 
precede  that  action.     It  would  be  always  most  desirable  that  it  should  pre- 


212  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY 

cede  it,  if  convenient,  to  guard  against  the  commitment  of  Congress,  on 
the  one  hand,  by  the  executive,  or  on  the  other,  what  might  seem  to  be  a 
violation  of  the  faith  of  the  country,  pledged  for  the  ratification  of  the 
treaty.  But  he  was  perfectly  aware,  that  it  would  be  very  often  highly 
inconvenient  to  deliberate,  in  a  body  so  numerous  as  Congress,  on  the  na- 
ture of  those  terms  on  which  it  might  be  proper  to  treat  with  foreign  pow- 
ers. In  the  view  of  the  subject  which  he  had  been  taking,  there  was  a 
much  higher  degree  of  security  to  the  interests  of  this  country.  For,  with 
all  respect  to  the  president  and  Senate,  it  could  not  disparage  the  wisdom 
of  their  councils,  to  add  to  that  of  this  House  also.  But,  if  the  concurrence 
of  this  House  be  not  necessary  in  the  cases  asserted,  if  there  be  no  restric- 
tion upon  the  power  he  was  considering,  it  might  draw  to  itself  and  ab- 
sorb the  whole  of  the  powers  of  government.  To  contract  alliances ;  to 
stipulate  for  raising  troops  to  be  employed  in  a  common  war  about  to  be 
waged  ;  to  grant  subsidies  ;  even  to  introduce  foreign  troops  within  the  bosom 
of  the  country ;  were  not  unfrequent  instauces  of  the  exercise  of  this  power ; 
and  if,  in  all  such  cases  the  honor  and  faith  of  the  nation  were  committed, 
by  the  exclusive  act  of  the  president  and  Senate,  the  melancholy  duty  alone 
might  be  left  to  Congress  of  recording  the  ruin  of  the  republic. 

Supposing,  however,  that  no  treaty,  which  undertakes  to  dispose  of  the 
territory  of  the  United  States,  is  valid,  without  the  concurrence  of  Con- 
gress, it  may  be  contended,  that  such  treaty  may  constitutionally  fix  the 
limits  of  the  territory  of  the  United  States,  where  they  are  disputed,  with- 
out co-operation  of  Congress.  He  admitted  it,  when  the  fixation  of  the 
limits  simply  was  the  object.  As  in  the  case  of  the  river  St.  Croix,  or  the 
more  recent  stipulation  in  the  treaty  of  Ghent,  or  in  that  of  the  treaty  of 
Spain  in  1795.  In  all  these  cases,  the  treaty-making  power  merely 
reduces  to  certainty  that  which  was  before  unascertained.  It  an- 
nounces the  fact;  it  proclaims,  in  a  tangible  form,  the  existence  of  the 
boundary.  It  does  not  make  a  new  boundary  ;  it  asserts  only  where  the 
old  boundary  was.  But  it  can  not,  under  color  of  fixing  a  boundary  pre- 
viously existing,  though  not  in  fact  marked,  undertake  to  cede  away, 
without,  the  concurrence  of  Congress,  whole  provinces.  If  the  subject  be 
one  of  a  mixed  character,  if  it  consists  partly  of  cession,  and  partly  of  the 
fixation  of  a  prior  limit,  he  contended  that  the  president  must  come  here 
for  the  consent  of  Congress.  But  in  the  Florida  treaty  it  was  not  pre- 
tended that  the  object  was  simply  a  declaration  of  where  the  western  limit 
of  Louisiana  was.  It  was,  on  the  contrary,  the  case  of  an  avowed  cession 
of  territory  from  the  United  States  to  Spain.  The  whole  of  the  corre- 
spondence manifested  that  the  respective  parties  to  the  negotiation  were  not 
engaged  so  much  in  an  inquiry  where  the  limit  of  Louisiana  was,  as  that 
they  were  exchanging  overtures  as  to  where  it  should  be.  Hence,  we  find 
various  limits  proposed  and  discussed.  At  one  time  the  Mississippi  is  pro- 
posed ;  then  the  Missouri ;  then  a  river  discharging  itself  into  the  gulf 
east  of  the  Sabine.     A  vast  desert  is  proposed  to  separate  the  territories 


ON   THE   SPANISH   TREATY.  213 

of  the  two  powers ;  and  finally  the  Sabine,  which  neither  of  the  parties 
had  ever  contended  was  the  ancient  limit  of  Louisiana,  is  adopted,  and  the 
boundary  is  extended  from  its  source  by  a  line  perfectly  new  and  arbitrary  ; 
and  the  treaty  itself  proclaims  its  purpose  to  be  a  cession  from  the  United 
States  to  Spain. 

The  second  resolution  comprehended  three  propositions ;  the  first  of 
which  was,  that  the  equivalent  granted  by  Spain  to  the  United  States,  for 
the  province  of  Texas,  was  inadequate.  To  determine  this,  it  was  neces- 
sary to  estimate  the  value  of  what  we  gave,  and  of  what  we  received. 
This  involved  an  inquiry  into  our  claim  to  Texas.  It  was  not  his  purpose 
to  enter  at  large  iuto  this  subject.  He  presumed  the  spectacle  would  not 
be  presented  of  questioning,  in  this  branch  of  the  government,  our  title  to 
Texas,  which  has  been  constantly  maintained  by  the  executive  for  more 
than  fifteen  years  past,  under  three  several  administrations.  He  was,  at 
the  same  time,  ready  and  prepared  to  make  out  our  title,  if  any  one  in  the 
House  were  fearless  enough  to  controvert  i:  He  would,  for  the  present, 
briefly  state,  that  the  man  who  is  most  familiar  with  the  transactions  of 
this  government,  who  largely  participated  in  the  formation  of  our  Con- 
stitution, and  all  that  has  been  done  under  it,  who,  besides  the  eminent 
services  that  he  has  rendered  his  country,  principally  contributed  to  the 
acquisition  of  Louisiana,  who  must  be  supposed,  from  his  various  oppor- 
tunities, best  to  know  its  limits,  declared,  fifteen  years  ago,  that  our  title  to 
the  Rio  del  Norte  was  as  well  founded  as  it  w'as  to  the  island  of  New 
Orleans.  [Here  Mr.  Clay  read  an  extract  from  a  memoir  presented  in 
1805,  by  Mr.  Monroe  and  Mr.  Pinckney,  to  Mr.  Cevallos,  proving  that  the 
boundary  of  Louisiana  extended  eastward  to  the  Perdido,  aud  westward 
to  the  Rio  del  Norte,  in  which  they  say,  "  the  facts  and  principles  which 
justify  this  conclusion,  are  so  satisfactory  to  their  government  as  to  con- 
vince it,  that  the  United  States  have  not  a  better  right  to  the  island  of 
New  Orleans,  under  the  cession  referred  to,  than  they  have  to  the  whole 
district  of  territory  thus  described."]  The  title  to  the  Perdido  on  the  one 
side,  and  to  the  Rio  del  Norte  on  the  other,  rested  on  the  same  principle — 
priority  of  discovery  and  of  occupation  by  France.  Spain  had  first  dis- 
covered and  made  an  establishment  at  Pensacola ;  France  at  Dauphine 
island,  in  the  bay  of  Mobile.  The  intermediate  space  was  unoccupied ; 
and  the  principle  observed  among  European  nations  having  contiguous 
settlements,  being,  that  the  unoccupied  space  between  them  should  be 
equally  divided,  was  applied  to  it,  and  the  Perdido  thus  became  the  com- 
mon boundary.  So,  west,  of  the  Mississippi,  La  Salle,  acting  under  France, 
in  1682  or  83,  first  discovered  that  river.  In  1685,  he  made  an  establish- 
ment on  the  bay  of  St.  Bernard,  west  of  the  Colorado,  emptying  into  it. 
The  nearest  Spanish  settlement  was  Panuco  ;  and  the  Rio  del  Norte,  about 
the  midway  line,  became  the  common  boundary. 

All  the  accounts  concurred  in  representing  Texas  to  be  extremely  valu 
able.     Its  superficial  extent  was  three  or  four  times  greater  than  that  of 


214  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

Florida.  The  climate  was  delicious  ;  the  soil  fertile  ;  the  margins  of  the 
rivers  abounding  in  live  oak;  and  the  country  admitting  of  easy  settle- 
ment. It  possessed,  moreover,  if  he  were  not  misinformed,  one  of  the 
finest  ports  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  The  productions  of  which  it  was  capa- 
ble  were  suited  to  our  wants.  The  unfortunate  captive  of  St.  Helena 
wished  for  ships,  commerce,  and  colonies.  We  have  them  all,  if  we  do 
not  wantonly  throw  them  away.  The  colonies  of  other  countries  are 
separated  from  them  by  vast  seas,  requiring  great  expense  to  protect  them, 
and  are  held  subject  to  a  constant  risk  of  their  being  torn  from  their  grasp. 
Our  colonies,  on  the  contrary,  are  united  to  and  form  part  of  our  con- 
tinent ;  and  the  same  Mississippi,  from  whose  rich  deposit  tho  best  of  them 
(Louisiana)  has  been  formed,  will  transport  on  her  bosom  the  brave,  the 
patriotic  men  from  her  tributary  streams,  to  defend  and  preserve  the  next 
most  valuable,  the  province  of  Texas. 

We  wanted  Florida,  or  rather  we  shall  want  it ;  or,  to  speak  more  cor- 
rectly, we  want  no  body  else  to  have  it.  We  do  not  desire  it  for  imme- 
diate use.  It  fills  a  sjjace  in  our  imagination,  and  we  wish  it  to  complete 
the  arrondissement  of  our  territory.  It  must  certainly  come  to  us.  The 
ripened  fruit  will  not  more  surely  fall.  Florida  is  inclosed  in  between 
Alabama  and  Georgia,  and  can  not  escape.  Texas  may.  Whether  we 
get  Florida  now,  or  some  five  or  ten  years  hence,  it  is  of  no  conse- 
quence, provided  no  other  power  gets  it ;  aud  if  any  other  power  should 
attempt  to  take  it,  an  existing  Act  of  Congress  authorizes  the  president  to 
prevent  it.  He  was  not  disposed  to  disparage  Florida,  but  its  intrinsic 
value  was  incomparably  less  than  that  of  Texas.  Almost  its  sole  value  was 
military.  The  possession  of  it  would  undoubtedly  communicate  some  ad- 
ditional security  to  Louisiana,  and  to  the  American  commerce  in  the  Gulf 
of  Mexico.  But  it  was  not  very  essential  to  have  it  for  protection  to 
Georgia  and  Alabama.  There  could  be  no  attack  on  either  of  them,  by  a 
foreign  power,  on  the  side  of  Florida.  It  now  covered  those  States.  An- 
nexed to  the  United  States,  and  we  should  have  to  extend  our  line  of  de- 
fense so  as  to  embrace  Florida.  Far  from  being,  therefore,  a  source  of 
immediate  profit,  it  would  be  the  occasion  of  considerable  immediate  ex- 
pense. The  acquisition  of  it  was  certainly  a  fair  object  of  our  policy  ;  and 
ought  never  to  be  lost  sight  of.  It  is  even  a  laudable  ambition,  in  any 
chief  magistrate,  to  endeavor  to  illustrate  the  epoch  of  his  administration 
by  such  an  acquisition.  It  was  less  necessary,  however,  to  fill  the  measure 
of  honors  of  the  present  chief  magistrate  than  that  of  any  other  man,  in 
consequence  of  the  large  share  which  he  had  in  obtaining  all  Louisiana. 
But,  whoever  may  deserve  the  renown  which  may  attend  the  incorporation 
of  Florida  into  our  confederacy,  it  is  our  business,  as  the  representatives  of 
that  people  who  are  to  pay  the  price  of  it,  to  take  care,  as  far  as  we  con- 
stitutionally can,  that  too  much  is  not  given.  He  would  not  give  Texas 
for  Florida  in  a  naked  exchange.  We  were  bound  by  the  treaty  to  give 
not  merely  Texas,  but  five  millions  of  dollars  also,  and  the  excess  beyond 


ON    THE    SPANISH    TREATY.  215 

that  sum  of  all  our  claims  upon  Spain,  which  have  been  variously  esti- 
mated at  from  fifteen  to  twenty  millions  of  dollars  ! 

Tiie  public  is  not  generally  apprized  of  another   large    consideration 
which  passed  from  us  to  Spain  ;  if  an  interpretation  which  he  had  heard 
given  to  the  treaty  were  just ;  and  it  certainly  was  plausible.     Subsequent 
to  the  transfer,  but  before  the  delivery  of  Louisiana  from  Spain  to  France, 
the  then  governor  of  New  Orleans  (he  believed  his  name  was  Gayoso) 
made  a  number  of  concessions,  upou  the  payment  of  an  inconsiderable 
pecuniary  consideration,  amounting  to  between  nine  hundred  thousand  and 
a  million  acres  of  land,  similar  to  those  recently  made  at  Madrid  to  the 
royal  favorites.     This  land  is  situated  in  Feliciana,  and  between  the  Mis- 
sissippi and  the  Amitie,  in  the  present  State  of  Louisiana.     It  was  granted 
to  persons  who  possessed  the  very  best  information  of  the  country,  and  is 
no  doubt,  therefore,  the  choice  land.     The  United  States  have  never  rec- 
ognized, but  have  constantly  denied  the  validity  of  these  concessions.     It 
is  contended  by  the  parties  concerned  that  they  are  confirmed  by  the  late 
treaty.     By  the  second  article  his  Catholic  majesty  cedes  to  the  United 
States,  in  full  property  and  sovereignty,  all  the  territories  which  belong  to 
him,  situated  to  the  eastward  of  the  Mississippi,  known  by  the  name  of 
East  and  West  Florida.     And  by  the   eighth   article,   all  grants   of  land 
made  before  the  24th  of  January,  1818,  by  his  Catholic  majesty,  or  by  his 
lawful  authorities,  shall  be  ratified  and  confirmed,  etc.     Now,  the  grants  in 
question  having  been  made  long  prior  to  that  day,  are  supposed  to  be  con- 
firmed.    He  understood  from  a  person  interested,  that  Don  Onis  had  as- 
sured him  it  was  his  intention  to  confirm  them.     Whether  the  American 
negotiator  had  the  same  intention  or  not,  he  did  not  know.     It  will  not  be 
pretended  that  the  letter  of  Mr.  Adams   of  the    12th  of  March,  1818,  in 
which  he  declines  to  treat  any  further  with  respect  to  any  part  of  the  ter- 
ritory included  within  the  limits  of  the  State  of  Louisiana,  can  control  the 
operation  of  the  subsequent  treaty.     That  treaty  must  be   interpreted  by 
what  is  in  it,  and  not  by  what  is  out  of  it.     The  overtures  which  passed 
between  the  parties  respectively,  prior  to  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty,  can 
neither  restrict  nor  enlarge  its  meaning.     Moreover,  when  Mr.  Madison 
occupied,  in  1811,  the  country  between  the  Mississippi  and  the  Perdido, 
he  declared  that  in  our  hands  it  should  be,  as  it  has  been,  subject  to  ne- 
gotiation. 

It  results,  then,  that  we  have  given  for  Florida,  charged  and  incumber- 
ed as  it  is, 

First,  unincumbered  Texas  ; 
Secondly,  five  millions  of  dollars  ; 

Thirdly,  a  surrender  of  all  our  claims  upon  Spain,  not  included  in  that 
five  millions ;  and, 

Fourthly,  if  the  interpretation  of  the  treaty  which  he  had  stated  were 
well  founded,  about  a  million  of  acres  of  the  best  unseated  land  in  the  State 
of  Louisiana,  worth  perhaps  ten  millions  of  dollars. 


216  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

The  first  proposition  contained  in  the  second  resolution,  was  thus,  he 
thought,  fully  sustained.  The  next  was,  that  it  was  inexpedient  to  cede 
Texas  to  any  foreign  power.  They  constituted,  in  his  opinio:],  a  sacred  in- 
heritance of  posterity,  which  we  ought  to  preserve  unimpaired.  He  wished 
it  was,  if  it  were  not,  a  fundamental  and  inviolable  law  of  the  land,  that 
they  should  be  inalienable  to  any  foreign  power.  It  was  quite  evi  lent, 
that  it  was  in  the  order  of  providence  ;  that  it  was  an  inevitable  result  of 
the  principle  of  population,  that  the  whole  of  this  continent,  including 
Texas,  was  to  be  peopled  in  process  of  time.  The  question  was,  by  whose 
race  shall  it  be  peopled  ?  In  our  hands  it  will  be  peopled  by  freemen,  and 
the  sous  of  freemen,  carrying  with  them  our  language,  our  laws,  and  our 
liberties ;  establishing,  on  the  prairies  of  Texas,  temples  dedicated  to  the 
simple  and  devout  modes  of  worship  of  God,  incident  to  our  religion,  and 
temples  dedicated  to  that  freedom  which  we  adore  next  to  Him.  In  the 
hands  of  others,  it  may  become  the  habitation  of  despotism  and  of  slaves, 
subject  to  the  vile  dominion  of  the  inquisition  aud  of  superstition.  He 
knew  that  there  were  honest  and  enlightened  men,  who  feared  that  our 
confederacy  was  already  too  large,  and  that  there  was  danger  of  disruption, 
arising  out  of  the  want  of  reciprocal  coherence  between  its  several  parts. 
He  hoped  and  believed,  that  the  principal  of  representation,  and  the  form- 
ation of  States,  would  preserve  us  a  united  people.  But  if  Texas,  after 
being  peopled  by  us,  and  grappling  with  us,  should,  at  some  distant  day, 
break  off,  she  will  carry  along  with  her  a  noble  crew,  consisting  of  our 
children's  children.  The  difference  between  those  who  might  be  disin- 
clined  to  its  annexation  to  our  confederacy,  and  him,  was,  that  their  system 
began  where  his  might,  possibly,  in  some  distant  future  day,  terminate ; 
and  theirs  begin  with  a  foreign  race,  aliens  to  every  thing  that  we  hold 
dear,  and  his  ended  with  a  race  partaking  of  all  our  qualities. 

The  last  proposition  which  the  second  resolution  affirms,  is,  that  it  is  in- 
expedient to  renew  the  treaty.  If  Spain  had  promptly  ratified  it,  bad  as 
it  is,  he  would  have  acquiesced  in  it.  After  the  protracted  negotiation 
which  it  terminated;  after  the  irritating  and  exasperating  correspondence 
which  preceded  it,  he  would  have  taken  the  treaty  as  a  man  who  has 
passed  a  long  and  restless  night,  turning  and  tossing  in  his  bed,  snatches 
at  day,  an  hour's  disturbed  repose.  But  she  would  not  ratify  it ;  she 
would  not  consent  to  be  bound  by  it ;  and  she  has  liberated  us  from  it. 
Is  it  wise  to  renew  the  negotiation,  if  it  is  to  be  recommenced,  by  announ- 
cing to  her  at  once  our  ultimatum  ?  Shall  we  not  give  her  the  vantage- 
ground  ?  In  early  life  he  had  sometimes  indulged  in  a  species  of  amuse- 
ment, which  years  and  experience  had  determined  him  to  renounce,  which, 
if  the  committee  would  allow  him  to  use  it,  furnished  him  with  a  figure — 
shall  we  enter  on  the  game,  with  our  hand  exposed  to  the  adversary,  while 
he  shuffles  the  cards  to  acquire  more  strength  ?  What  has  lost  us  his 
ratification  of  the  treaty  \  Incontestably,  our  importunity  to  procure  the 
ratification,  and  the  hopes  which  that  importunity  inspired,  that  he  could 


ON   THE    SPANISH    TREATY.  217 

yet  obtain  more  from  us.  Let  us  undeceive  him.  Let  us  proclaim  the 
acknowledged  truth,  that  the  treaty  is  prejudicial  to  the  interests  of  this 
country.  Are  we  not  told  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  in  the  bold  and  con- 
fident assertion,  that  Don  Onis  was  authorized  to  grant  us  much  more,  and 
that  Spain  dare  not  deny  his  instructions  ?  The  line  of  demarcation  is  far 
within  his  limits  !  If  she  would  have  then  granted  us  more,  is  her  posi- 
tion now  more  favorable  to  her  in  the  negotiation  ?  In  our  relations  to 
foreign  powers,  it  may  be  sometimes  politic  to  sacrifice  a  portion  of  our 
rights  to  secure  the  residue.  But  is  Spain  such  a  power,  as  that  it  be- 
comes us  to  sacrifice  those  rights  \  Is  she  entitled  to  it  by  her  justice,  by 
her  observance  of  good  faith,  or  by  her  possible  annoyance  of  us  in  the 
event  of  war  ?  She  will  seek,  as  she  has  sought,  procrastination  in  the 
negotiation,  taking  the  treaty  as  the  basis.  She  will  dare  to  offend  us,  as 
she  has  insulted  us,  by  asking  the  disgraceful  stipulation,  that  we  shall  not 
recognize  the  patriots.  Let  us  put  aside  the  treaty ;  tell  her  to  grant 
us  our  rights,  to  their  uttermost  extent.  And  il  she  still  palters,  let  us 
assert  those  rights  by  whatever  measures  it  is  for  the  interest  of  our 
country  to  adopt. 

If  the  treaty  was  abandoned  ;  if  we  were  not  on  the  contrary  signified, 
too  distinctly,  that  there  was  to  be  a  continued  and  unremitting  endeavor 
to  obtain  its  revival ;  he  would  not  think  it  advisable  for  this  House  to  in- 
terpose. But,  with  all  the  information  in  our  possession,  and  holding  the 
opinions  which  he  entertained,  he  thought  it  the  bounden  duty  of  the 
House  to  adopt  the  resolutions.  He  had  acquitted  himself  of  what  he 
deemed  a  solemn  duty,  in  bringing  up  the  subject.  Others  could  discharge 
theirs  according-  to  their  own  sense  of  them. 


ON  THE  PROTECTION  OF  HOME  INDUSTRY. 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OP  REPRESENTATIVES,  APRIL  26,  1820. 

[Fkom  the  beginning  of  Mr.  Clay's  public  life,  as  far  back  as 
his  appearance  in  the  Legislature  of  Kentucky,  he  was  ever  a 
steady,  vigilant,  and  vigorous  advocate  for  the  protection  of 
home  industry.  Amid  all  the  fluctuations  of  opinion  with  other 
statesmen,  and  in  face  of  all  the  free-trade  theories  of  econo- 
mists, he  never  deviated  on  this  subject.  It  was  a  part  of  his 
natural  instincts  to  discern  the  position  of  American  capital, 
labor,  and  art,  as  they  are  affected  by  foreign  interests  of  the 
same  kind,  and  to  sympathize  with  the  former,  when  suffering 
disadvantage  by  the  action  of  the  latter  upon  them.  Eminently 
practical  in  his  views,  Mr.  Clay  had  very  little  respect  for  the 
abstract  theories  of  economists. 

The  war  of  1812  had,  by  necessity,  built  up  a  system  of 
American  manufactures,  and  when  peace  came,  it  began  to  tot- 
ter and  fall,  in  competition  with  foreign  products  of  the  same 
classes.  The  Tariff  of  1816  was  enacted  to  save  it,  but  it  proved 
inadequate,  or  not  well  adapted.  The  experience  of  the  country 
for  the  first  five  years  subsequent  to  the  peace,  had  taught  our 
statesmen  what  was  wanted,  and  the  Tariff  bill  of  1820  was 
prepared  with  great  care,  and  reported  by  Mr.  Baldwin  of  Penn- 
sylvania, who  was  afterward  promoted  to  the  bench  of  the  Su- 
preme Court  of  the  United  States.  It  was  in  support  of  this 
bill  that  the  following  speech  was  made.  The  bill  passed  the 
House  by  a  vote  of  ninety  to  sixty-nine,  but  failed  in  the  Senate 
by  twenty-two  against  twenty-one — so  narrow  a  chance  doomed 
the  country  to  four  years  more  of  the  greatest  commercial  em- 
barrassments ;  for  it  was  not  till  the  Tariff  of  1824  that  trade 
and  business  began  to  revive.  Mr.  Clay  afterward  found,  by 
comparison,  that  the  seven  years  previous  to  the  Tariff  of  1824 
was  a  period  of  the  greatest  commercial  depression,  and  the  seven 
years  subsequent  to  that  event  a  period  of  the  greatest  commer- 
cial prosperity  which  the  country  had  ever  experienced.     The 


ON  THE  PROTECTION  OF  HOME  INDUSTRY.        219 

last  four  years  of  the  first-named  period — the  most  pinching 
and  most  distressing  of  the  seven — were  brought  about  by  that 
unfortunate  vote  of  the  Senate,  in  1820,  of  twenty-two  to 
twenty-one.  The  vote  of  the  House  for  the  Tariff  of  1820  was 
a  decided  majority-  To  this  result,  the  following  speech  of  Mr. 
Clay  no  doubt  contributed  in  a  very  large  measure.  Probably 
it  was  the  means  of  it.  Pity  that  the  same  influence  could  not 
have  been  carried  into  the  Senate  ;  for  four  years  of  such  ad- 
versity was  an  incalculable  subtraction  from  the  wealth  of  the 
country.] 

Mr.  Chairman — Whatever  may  be  the  value  of  my  opinions  on  tho 
interesting  subject  now  before  us,  they  have  not  been  hastily  formed.  It 
may  possibly  be  recollected  by  some  gentlemen  that  I  expressed  them  when 
the  existing  tariff  was  adopted  ;  and  that  I  then  urged,  that  the  period  of 
the  termination  of  the  war,  during  which  the  manufacturing  industry  of 
the  country  had  received  a  powerful  spring,  was  precisely  that  period  when 
government  was  alike  impelled,  by  duty  and  interest,  to  protect  it  against 
the  free  admission  of  foreign  fabrics,  consequent  upon  a  state  of  peace.  I 
insisted,  on  that  occasion,  that  a  less  measure  of  protection  would  prove 
more  efficacious,  at  that  time,  than  one  of  greater  extent  at  a  future  day. 
My  wishes  prevailed  only  in  part ;  and  we  are  now  called  upon  to  decide 
whether  we  will  correct  the  error  which,  I  think,  we  then  committed. 

In  considering  the  subject,  the  first  important  inquiry  that  we  should 
make  is,  whether  it  be  desirable  that  such  a  portion  of  the  capital  and 
labor  of  the  country  should  be  employed  in  the  business  of  manufacturing, 
as  would  furnish  a  supply  of  our  necessary  wants  ?  Since  the  first  colon- 
ization of  America,  the  principal  direction  of  the  labor  and  capital  of  the 
inhabitants  has  been  to  produce  raw  materials  for  the  consumption  or  fab- 
rication of  foreign  nations.  We  have  always  had,  in  great  abundance, 
the  means  of  subsistence,  but  we  have  derived  chiefly  from  other  countries 
our  clothes,  and  the  instruments  of  defense.  Except  during  those  inter- 
ruptions of  commerce  arising  from  a  state  of  war,  or  from  measures 
adopted  for  vindicating  our  commercial  rights,  we  have  experienced  no 
very  great  inconvenience  heretofore  from  this  mode  of  supply.  The  lim- 
ited amount  of  our  surplus  produce,  resulting  from  the  smalluess  of  our 
numbers,  and  the  long  and  ai  duous  covwulsions  of  Europe,  secured  us  good 
markets  for  that  surplus  in  her  ports,  or  those  of  her  colonies.  But  those 
convulsions  have  now  ceased,  and  our  population  has  reached  nearly  ten 
millions.  r K  new  epoch  has  arisen  ;  and  it  becomes  us  deliberately  to  con-~| 
template  our  own  actual  condition,  and  the  relations  which  are  likely  to 
exist  between  us  and  the  other  parts  of  the  world.  I  The  actual  state  of 
our  population,  and  the  ratio  of  its  progressive  increase,  when  compared 
with  the  ratio  of  the  increase  of  the  population  of  the   countries  which 


220  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

have  hitherto  consumed  our  raw  produce,  seem,  to  me,  alone  to  demon- 
strate the  necessity  of  diverting  some  portion  of  our  industry  from  its  ac- 
customed channel.  We  double  our  population  in  or  about  the  term  of 
twenty-five  years.  If  there  be  no  change  in  the  mode  of  exerting  our  in- 
dustry, Ave  shall  double,  during  the  same  term,  the  amount  of  our  export- 
able produce.  Europe,  including  such  of  her  colonies  as  we  have  free  ac- 
cess to,  taken  altogether,  does  not  duplicate  her  population  in  a  shorter 
term,  probably,  than  one  hundred  years.  The  ratio  of  the  increase  of  her 
capacity  of  consumption,  therefore,  is,  to  that  of  our  capacity  of  pro- 
duction, as  one  is  to  four.  And  it  is  manifest,  from  the  simple  exhibition 
of  the  powers  of  the  consuming  countries,  compared  with  those  of  the 
supplying  country,  that  the  former  are  inadequate  to  the  latter.  It  is 
certainly  true,  that  a  portion  of  the  mass  of  our  raw  produce,  which  we 
transmit  to  her,  reverts  to  us  in  a  fabricated  form,  and  that  this  return  aug- 
ments with  our  increasing  population.  This  is,  however,  a  very  inconsid- 
erable addition  to  her  actual  ability  to  afford  a  market  for  the  produce  of 
our  industry. 

I  believe  that  we  are  already  beginning  to  experience  the  want  of  ca- 
pacity in  Europe  to  consume  our  surplus  produce.  Take  the  articles  of 
cotton,  tobacco,  and  bread-stuffs.  For  the  latter  we  have  scarcely  any  for- 
eign demand.  And  is  there  not  reason  to  believe  that  we  have  reached 
if  we  have  not  passed,  the  maximum  of  the  foreign  demand  for  the  other 
two  articles  ?  Considerations  connected  with  the  cheapness  of  cotton,  as 
a  raw  material,  and  the  facility  with  which  it  can  be  fabricated,  will  prob- 
ably make  it  to  be  more  and  more  used  as  a  substitute  for  other  materials. 
But,  after  you  allow  to  the  demand  for  it  the  utmost  extension  of  which  it 
is  susceptible,  it  is  yet  quite  limited — limited  by  the  number  of  persons 
who  use  it,  by  their  wants  and  their  ability  to  supply  them.  If  we  have 
not  reached,  therefore,  the  maximum  of  the  foreign  demand  (as  I  believe 
we  have),  we  must  soon  fully  satisfy  it.  With  respect  to  tobacco,  that  ar- 
ticle affording  an  enjoyment  not  necessary,  as  food  and  clothes  are,  to 
human  existeuce,  the  foreign  demaud  for  it  is  still  more  precarious,  and  I 
apprehend  that  we  have  already  passed  its  limits.  It  appears  to  me,  then, 
that,  if  we  consult  our  interests  merely,  we  ought  to  encourage  home 
manufactures.  But  there  are  other  motives  to  recommend  it,  of  not  less 
importance. 

The  wants  of  man  may  be  classed  under  three  heads :  food,  raiment,  and 
defense.  They  are  felt  alike  in  the  state  of  barbarism  and  of  civilization. 
He  must  be  defended  against  the  ferocious  beast  of  prey  in  the  one  condi- 
tion, and  against  the  ambition,  violence,  and  injustice  incident  to  the 
other.  If  he  seeks  to  obtain  a  supply  of  those  wants  without  giving  an 
equivalent,  he  is  a  beggar  or  a  robber ;  if  by  promising  au  equivalent 
which  he  can  not  give,  he  is  fraudulent,  and  if  by  commerce,  in  which 
there  is  perfect  freedom  on  his  side,  while  he  meets  with  nothing  but  re- 
strictions on  the  other,  he  submits  to  an  unjust  and  degrading  inequality. 


ON    THE    PKOTECTION   OF    HOME    INDUSTRY.  221 

What  is  true  of  individuals  is  equally  so  of  nations.  The  country,  then, 
which  relies  upon  foreign  nations  for  either  of  those  great  essentials,  is  not, 
in  fact,  independent.  Nor  is  it  any  consolation  for  our  dependence  upon 
other  nations  that  they  are  also  dependent  upon  us,  even  were  it  true. 
Every  nation  should  anxiously  endeavor  to  establish  its  absolute  independ- 
ence, and  consequently  be  able  to  feed,  and  clothe,  and  defend  itself.  If  iF~ 
rely  upon  a  foreign  supply,  that  may  be  cut  oft'  by  the  caprice  of  the  nation 
yielding  it,  by  war  with  it,  or  even  by  war  with  other  nations ;  it  can  not 
be  independent.  But  it  is  not  true  that  any  other  nations  depend  upon  us 
in  a  degree  any  thing  like  equal  to  that  of  our  dependence  upon  them  for 
the  great  necessaries  to  which  I  have  referred.  Every  other  nation  seeks 
to  supply  itself  with  them  from  its  own  resources ;  and  so  strong  is  the 
desire  which  they  feel  to  accomplish  this  purpose,  that  they  exclude  the 
cheaper  foreign  article  for  the  dearer  home  production.  Witness  the  En- 
glish policy  in  regard  to  corn.  So  selfish,  in  this  respect,  is  the  conduct 
of  other  powers  that,  in  some  instances,  they  even  prohibit  the  produce  of 
the  industry  of  their  own  colonies  when  it  comes  into  competition  with  the 
produce  of  the  parent  country.  All  other  countries  but  our  own  exclude  by 
high  duties,  or  absolute  prohibitions,  whatever  they  can  respectively  pro- 
duce within  themselves.  {The  truth  is,  and  it  is  in  vain  to  disguise  it,  that 
we  are  a  sort  of  independent  colonies  of  England — politically  free,  com- 
mercially slaves.  Gentlemen  tell  us  of  the  advantage  of  a  free  exebauge 
of  the  produce  of  the  workh  But  they  tell  us  of  what  has  never  existed,  does 
not  exist,  and  perhaps  never  will  exist.  They  invoke  us  to  give  perfect 
freedom  on  our  side,  while,  in  the  ports  of  every  other  nation,  we  are  met 
with  a  code  of  odious  restrictions,  shutting  out  entirely  a  great  part  of  our 
produce,  and  letting  in  only  so  much  as  they  can  not  possibly  do  without* 
I  will  hereafter  examine  their  favorite  maxim,  of  leaving  things  to  them- 
selves, more  particularly.  At  present  I  will  only  say  that  I  too  am  a  friend 
to  free  trade,  but  it  must  be  a  free  trade  of  perfect  reciprocity.  If  the  gov- 
erning consideration  were  cheapness  ;  if  national  independence  were  to 
weigh  nothing ;  if  honor  nothing ;  why  not  subsidize  foreign  powers  to 
defend  us?  why  not  hire  Swiss  or  Hessian  mercernaries  to  protect  us  1  why 
not  get  our  arms  of  all  kinds,  as  we  do  in  part,  the  blankets  and  clothing 
of  our  soldiers,  from  abroad  ?  We  should  probably  consult  economy  by 
these  dangerous  expedients. 

But,  say  gentlemen,  there  are  to  the  manufacturing  system  some  in- 
herent objections,  which  should  induce  us  to  avoid  its  introduction  into 
this  country ;  and  we  are  warned  by  the  example  of  England,  by  her  pau- 
perism, by  the  vices  of  her  population,  her  wars,  and  so  forth.  It  would 
be  a  strange  order  of  Providence,  if  it  were  true,  that  he  should  create  nec- 
essary and  indispensable  wants,  and  yet  should  render  us  unable  to  supply 
them  without  the  degradation  or  contamination  of  our  species. 

Pauperism  is,  in  general,  the  effect  of  an  overflowing  population.  Man- 
ufactures may  undoubtedly  produce  a  redundant  population  ;  but  so  may 


222  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

commerce,  and  so  may  agriculture.  In  tins  respect  they  are  alike ;  and 
from  whatever  cause  the  disproportion  of  a  population  to  the  subsisting 
faculty  of  a  country  may  proceed,  its  effect  on  pauperism  is  the  same. 
Many  parts  of  Asia  would  exhibit,  perhaps,  as  afflicting  effects  of  an  ex- 
treme prosecution  of  the  agricultural  system,  as  England  can  possibly 
furuish  respecting  the  manufacturing.  It  is  not,  however,  fair  to  argue 
from  these  extreme  cases  against  either  the  one  system  or  the  other. 
There  are  abuses  incident  to  every  branch  of  industry,  to  every  profession. 
It  would  not  be  thought  very  just  or  wise  to  arraign  the  honorable  profes- 
sions of  law  and  physic,  because  the  one  produces  the  pettifogger,  and 
the  other  the  quack.  Even  in  England  it  has  been  established,  by  the 
diligent  search  of  Colquhoun,  from  the  most  authentic  evidence,  the 
judicial  records  of  the  country,  that  the  instances  of  crime  were  much 
more  numerous  in  the  agricultural  than  in  the  manufacturing  districts ; 
thus  proving  that  die  cause  of  wretchedness  and  vice,  in  that  country,  was 
to  be  sought  for,  not  in  this  or  that  system,  so  much  as  in  the  fact  of  the 
density  of  its  population.  France  resembles  this  country  more  than  En- 
gland, in  respect  to  the  employments  of  her  population ;  and  we  do  not 
find  that  there  is  any  thing  in  the  condition  of  the  manufacturing  portion 
of  it  which  ouafht  to  dissuade  us  from  the  introduction  of  it  into  our  own 
country.  But  even  France  has  not  that  great  security  against  the  abuses 
of  the  manufacturing  system,  against  the  effects  of  too  great  a  density  of 
population,  which  Ave  possess  in  our  waste  lands.  While  this  resource 
exists  we  have  nothing  to  apprehend.  Do  capitalists  give  too  low  wages 
— are  the  laborers  too  crowded,  and  in  danger  of  starving  ?  the  unsettled 
lands  will  draw  off  the  redundancy,  and  leave  the  others  better  provided 
for.  If  an  unsettled  province,  such  as  Texas,  for  example,  could,  by  some 
convulsion  of  nature,  be  wafted  alongside  of,  and  attached  to  the  island  of 
Great  Britain,  the  instantaneous  effect  would  be,  to  draw  off  the  redundant 
portion  of  the  population,  and  to  render  more  comfortable  both  the  emi- 
grants and  those  whom  they  would  leave  behind.  I  am  aware,  that  while 
the  public  domain  is  an  acknowledged  security  against  the  abuses  of  the 
manufacturing,  or  any  other  system,  it  constitutes,  at  the  same  time,  an 
impediment,  in  the  opinion  of  some,  to  the  success  of  manufacturing  in- 
dustry, by  its  tendency  to  prevent  the  reduction  of  the  wages  of  labor. 
Those  who  urge  this  objection  have  their  eyes  too  much  fixed  on  the 
ancient  system  of  manufacturing,  when  manual  labor  was  the  principal  in- 
strument which  it  employed.  During  the  last  half  century,  since  the 
inventions  of  Arkwright,  and  the  long  train  of  improvements  which  fol- 
lowed, the  labor  of  machinery  is  principally  used.  I  have  understood, 
from  sources  of  information  which  I  believe  to  be  accurate,  that  the  com- 
bined force  of  all  the  machinery  employed  by  Great  Britain,  in  manufac- 
turing, is  equal  to  the  labor  of  one  hundred  millions  of  able-bodied  men. 
If  we  suppose  the  aggregate  of  the  labor  of  all  the  individuals  which  she 
employs,  in  that  branch  of  industry,  to  be  equal  to  the  united  labor  of  two 


ON    THE    PROTECTION    OF    HOME   INDUSTRY.  223 

millions  of  able-bodied  men  (and  I  should  think  it  does  not  exceed  it), 
machine  labor  will  stand  to  manual  labor  in  the  proportion  of  one  hundred 
to  two.  There  can  not  be  a  doubt  that  we  have  skill  and  enterprise 
enough  to  command  the  requisite  amount  of  machine  power. 

There  are,  too,  some  checks  to  emigration  from  the  settled  parts  of  our 
country  to  the  waste  lands  of  the  west.     Distance  is  one,  and  it  is  every 
day  becoming  greater  and  greater.     There  exists,  also  a  natural  repug- 
nance  (felt  less,  it  is  true,  in  the  United  States  than  elsewhere,  but  felt 
even  here),  to  abandoning  the  place  of  our  nativity.     Women  and  children 
who  could  not  migrate,  and  who  would  be  comparatively  idle  if  manufac- 
tures did  not  exist,  may  be  profitably  employed  in  them.     This  is  a  very 
great  benefit.     I  wituessed  the  advantage  resulting  from  the  employment 
of  this  description  of  our  population,  in  a  visit  which  I  lately  made  to  the 
Waltham  manufactory,  near  Boston.     There,  some  hundreds  of  girls  and 
boys  were  occupied  in  separate  apartments.     The  greatest,  order,  neatness, 
and  apparent  comfort,  reigned  throughout  the  whole  establishment.     The 
daughters  of  respectable  farmers,  in  one  instance,  I  remember,  the  daugh- 
ter of  a  senator  in  the  State  Legislature,  were  usefully  employed.     They 
would  come  down  to  the  manufactory,  remain  perhaps  some  months,  and 
return,  with  their  earnings,  to  their  families,  to  assist  them  throughout  the 
year,     But  one  instance  had  occurred,  I  was  informed  by  the  intelligent 
manager,  of  doubtful  conduct  on  the  part  of  any  of  the  females,  and,  after 
she  was  dismissed,  there  was  reason  to  believe  that  injustice  had  been  done 
her.     Suppose  that  establishment  to  be  destroyed,  what  would  become  of 
all  the  persons  who  are  there  engaged  so  beneficially  to  themselves,  and  so 
usefully  to  the  State  ?     Can  it  be  doubted  that,  if  the  crowds  of  little  men-* 
dicant  boys  and  girls  who  infest  this  edifice,  and  assail  us,  every  day,  at  its 
very  thresholds,  as  we  come  in  and  go  out,  begging  for  a  cent,  were  em- 
ployed in  some  manufacturing  establishment,  it  would  be  better  for  them, 
and  the  city  ?     Those  who  object  to  the  manufacturing  system  should  rec- 
ollect, that  constant  occupation  is  the  best  security  for  innocence  and  vir- 
tue, and  that  idleness  is  the  parent  of  vice  and  crime.     They  should  con- 
template the  laboring  poor  with  employment,  and  ask  themselves  what 
would  be  their  condition  without  it.     If  there  are  instances  of  hard  task- 
masters among  the  manafacturers,  so  also  are  there  in  agriculture.     The 
cause  is  to  be  sought  for,  not  in  the  nature  of  this  or  that  system,  but  in 
the  nature  of  man.     If  there  are  particular  species  of  unhealthy  employ- 
ment in  manufactures,  so  there  are  in  agriculture  also.     There  has  been  an 
idle  attempt  to  ridicule  the  manufacturing  system,  and  we  have  heard  the 
expression,  "  spinning-jenny  tenure."     It  is  one  of  the  noblest  inventions  of 
human  skill.     It  has  diffused  comforts  among  thousands  who,  without  it, 
would  never  have  enjoyed  them ;  and  millions  yet  unborn  will  bless  the 
man  by  whom  it  was  invented.     Three  important  inventions  have  distin- 
guished the  last  half  century,  each  of  which,  if  it  had  happened  at  long 
intervals  of  time  from  the  other,  would  have  been  sufficient  to  constitute 


224  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

an  epoch  in  the  progress  of  the  useful  arts.  The  first  was  that  of  Ark- 
wright ;  and  our  own  country  is  entitled  to  the  merit  of  the  other  two. 
The  world  is  indebted  to  Whitney  for  the  one,  and  to  Fulton  for  the  other. 
Nothing  is  secure  against  the  shafts  of  ridicule.  What  would  be  thought 
of  a  man  who  should  speak  of  a  cotton-gin  tenure,  or  a  steamboat  tenure  ? 

In  one  respect  there  is  a  great  difference  in  favor  of  manufactures,  when 
compared  with  agriculture.  It  is  the  rapidity  with  which  the  whole  man- 
ufacturing community  avail  themselves  of  an  improvement.  It  is  instantly 
communicated  and  put  in  operation.  There  is  an  avidity  for  improvement 
in  the  one  system,  an  aversion  to  it  in  the  other.  The  habits  of  generation 
after  generation  pass  down  the  long  track  of  time  in  perpetual  succession 
without  the  slightest  change  in  agriculture.  The  plowman  who  fastens 
his  plow  to  the  tails  of  his  cattle,  will  not  own  that  there  is  any  other 
mode  equal  to  his.  An  agricultural  people  will  be  in  the  neighborhood 
of  other  communities,  who  have  made  the  greatest  progress  in  husbandry, 
without  advancing  in  the  slightest  degree.  Many  parts  of  our  country  are 
one  hundred  years  in  advance  of  Sweden  in  the  cultivation  and  improve- 
ment of  the  soil. 

It  is  objected,  that  the  effect  of  the  encouragement  of  home  manufacture, 
by  the  proposed  tariff,  will  be,  to  diminish  the  revenue  from  the  customs. 
The  amount  of  the  revenue  from  that  source  will  depend  upon  the  amount 
of  importations,  and  the  measure  of  these  will  be  the  value  of  the  exports 
from  this  country.  The  quantity  of  the  exportable  produce  will  depend 
upon  the  foreign  demand ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  under  any  dis- 
tribution of  the  labor  and  capital  of  this  country,  from  the  greater  allure- 
ments which  agriculture  presents  than  any  other  species  of  industry,  there 
would  be  always  a  quantity  of  its  produce  sufficient  to  satisfy  that  demand. 
If  there  be  a  diminution  in  the  ability  of  foreign  nations  to  consume  our 
raw  produce,  in  the  proportion  of  our  diminished  consumption  of  theirs, 
under  the  operation  of  this  system,  that  will  be  compensated  by  the  substi- 
tution of  a  home  for  a  foreign  market,  in  the  same  proportion.  It  is  true 
that  we  can  not  remain  in  the  relation  of  seller,  only  to  foreign  powers,  for 
any  length  of  time ;  but  if  as  I  have  no  doubt,  our  agriculture  will  con- 
tinue to  supply,  as  far  as  it  can  profitably,  to  the  extent  of  the  limits  of 
foreign  demand,  we  shall  receive  not  only  in  return  many  of  the  articles  on 
which  the  tariff  operates,  for  our  own  consumption,  but  they  may  also  form 
the  objects  of  trade  with  South  America  and  other  powers,  and  our  com- 
forts may  be  multiplied  by  the  importation  of  other  articles.  Diminished 
consumption,  in  consequence  of  the  augmentation  of  duties,  does  not  nec- 
essarily imply  diminished  revenue.  The  increase  of  the  duty  may  com- 
pensate the  decrease  in  the  consumption,  and  give  you  as  large  a  revenue 
as  you  before  possessed. 

Can  any  one  doubt  the  impolicy  of  government  resting  solely  upon  the 
precarious  resource  of  such  a  revenue  ?  It  is  constantly  fluctuating.  It 
tempts  us,  by  its  enormous  amount,  at  one  time,  into  extravagant  expend- 


ON    THE    PROTECTION    OF    HOME    INDUSTRY.  225 

iture ;  and  we  are  then  driven,  by  its  sudden  and  unexpected  depression, 
into  the  opposite  extreme.  We  are  seduced  by  its  flattering  promises  into 
expenses  which  we  might  avoid ;  and  we  are  afterward  constrained  by 
its  treachery,  to  avoid  expenses  which  we  ought  to  make.  It  is  a  system 
under  which  there  is  a  sort  of  perpetual  war,  between  the  interest  of  the 
government  and  the  interest  of  the  people.  Large  importations  fill  the 
coffers  of  government,  and  empty  the  pockets  of  the  people.  Small  im- 
portations imply  prudence  on  the  part  of  the  people,  and  leave  the  treasury 
empty.  In  war,  the  revenue  disappears ;  in  peace  it  is  unsteady.  On 
such  a  system  the  government  will  not  be  able  much  longer  exclusively  to 
rely.  We  all  anticipate  that  we  shall  have  shortly  to  resort  to  some  ad- 
ditional supply  of  revenue  within  ourselves.  I  was  opposed  to  the  total 
repeal  of  the  internal  revenue.  I  would  have  preserved  certain  parts  of 
it  at  least,  to  be  ready  for  emergences  such  as  now  exist.  And  I  am,  for 
one,  ready  to  exclude  foreign  spirits  altogether,  and  substitute  for  the  rev- 
enue levied  on  them  a  tax  upon  the  spirits  made  within  the  country. 
No  other  nation  lets  in  so  much  of  foreign  spirits  as  we  do.  By  the  en- 
couragement of  home  industry,  you  will  lay  a  basis  of  internal  taxation, 
when  it  gets  strong,  that  will  be  steady  and  uniform  yielding  alike  in  peace 
and  in  war.  We  do  not  derive  our  ability  from  abroad,  to  pay  taxes. 
That  depends  upon  our  wealth  and  our  industry ;  and  it  is  the  same,  what- 
ever may  be  the  form  of  levying  the  public  contributions. 

But  it  is  urged,  that  you  tax  other  interests  of  the  State  to  sustain  man- 
ufacturers. The  business  of  manufacturing,  if  encouraged,  will  be  open  to 
all.  It  is  not  for  the  sake  of  the  particular  individuals  who  may  happen 
to  be  engaged  in  it,  that  we  propose  to  foster  it ;  but  it  is  for  the  general 
interest.  We  think  that  it  is  necessary  to  the  comfort  and  well-being  of 
society,  that  fabrication,  as  well  as  the  business  of  production  and  distri- 
bution, should  be  supported  and  taken  care  of.  Now,  if  it  be  even  true, 
that  the  price  of  the  home  fabric  will  be  somewhat  higher,  in  the  first  in- 
stance, than  the  rival  foreign  articles,  that  consideration  ought  not  to  pre- 
vent our  extending  reasonable  protection  to  the  home  fabric.  Present 
temporary  inconvenience  may  be  well  submitted  to  for  the  sake  of  future 
permanent  benefit.  If  the  experience  of  all  other  countries  be  not  utterly 
fallacious ;  if  the  promises  of  the  manufacturing  system  be  not  absolutely 
illusory ;  by  the  competition  which  will  be  elicited  in  consequence  of  your 
parental  care,  prices  will  be  ultimately  brought  down  to  a  level  with  that 
of  the  foreign  commodity.  Now,  in  a  scheme  of  policy  which  is  devised 
for  a  nation,  we  should  not  limit  our  views  to  its  operation  during  a  single 
year,  or  for  even  a  short  term  of  years.  We  should  look  at  its  operation 
for  a  considerable  time,  and  in  war  as  well  as  in  peace.  Can  there  be  a 
doubt,  thus  contemplating  it,  that  we  shall  be  compensated  by  the  certainty 
and  steadiness  of  the  supply  in  all  seasons,  and  the  ultimate  reduction  of 
the  price  for  any  temporary  sacrifices  we  make  ?  Take  the  example  of 
salt,  which  the  ingenious  gentleman  from  Virginia  (Mr.  Archer)  has  ad- 

15 


226  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

duced.  He  says,  during  the  war,  the  price  of  that  article  rose  to  ten  dol- 
lars per  bushel,  and  he  asks  if  you  would  lay  a  duty,  permanent  in  its 
duration,  of  three  dollars  per  bushel,  to  secure  a  supply  in  war.  I  answer, 
no,  I  would  not  lay  so  high  a  duty.  That  which  is  now  proposed,  for  the 
encouragement  of  the  domestic  production,  is  only  five  cents  per  bushel. 
In  forty  years,  the  duty  would  amount  only  to  two  dollars.  If  the  recur- 
rence of  war  shall  be  only  after  intervals  of  forty  years'  peace  (and  we 
may  expect  it  probably  oftener),  and  if,  when  it  does  come,  the  same  price 
should  again  be  given,  there  will  be  a  clear  saving  of  eight  dollars,  by  pro- 
moting the  domestic  fabrication.  All  society  is  an  affair  of  mutual  con- 
cession. If  we  expect  to  derive  the  benefits  which  are  incident  to  it,  we 
must  sustain  our  reasonable  share  of  burdens.  The  great  interests  which 
it  is  intended  to  guard  and  cherish,  must  be  supported  by  their  reciprocal 
action  and  re-action.  The  harmony  of  its  parts  is  disturbed,  the  discipline 
which  is  necessary  to  its  order  is  incomplete,  when  one  of  the  three  great 
and  essential  branches  of  its  industry  is  abandoned  and  unprotected.  If 
you  want  to  find  an  example  of  order,  of  freedom  from  debt,  of  economy, 
of  expenditure  falling  below  rather  than  exceeding  income,  you  will  go  to 
the  well-regulated  family  of  a  farmer.  You  will  go  to  the  house  of  such 
a  man  as  Isaac  Shelby ;  you  will  not  find  him  haunting  taverns,  en- 
gaged in  broils,  prosecuting  angry  lawsuits ;  you  will  behold  every  mem- 
ber of  his  family  clad  with  the  produce  of  their  own  hands,  and  usefully 
employed ;  the  spinning-wheel  and  the  loom  in  motion  by  day-break. 
With  what  pleasure  will  his  wife  carry  you  into  her  neat  dairy,  lead  you 
into  her  store-house,  and  point  you  to  the  table-cloths,  the  sheets,  the 
counterpanes  which  lie  on  this  shelf  for  one  daughter,  or  on  that  for  an- 
other, all  prepared  in  advance  by  her  provident  care  for  the  day  of  their 
respective  marriages.  If  you  want  to  see  an  opposite  example,  go  to  the 
house  of  a  man  who  manufactures  nothing  at  home,  whose  family  resorts 
to  the  store  for  every  thing  they  consume.  You  will  find  him  perhaps  in 
the  tavern,  or  at  the  shop  at  the  cross-roads.  He  is  engaged,  with  the 
rum-grog  on  the  table,  taking  depositions  to  make  out  some  case  of  usury 
or  fraud.  Or  perhaps  he  is  furnishing  to  his  lawyer  the  materials  to  pre- 
pare a  long  bill  of  injunction  in  some  intricate  case.  The  sheriff  is  hover- 
ing about  his  farm  to  serve  some  new  writ.  On  court-days — he  never 
misses  attending  them — you  will  find  him  eagerly  collecting  his  witnesses 
to  defend  himself  against  the  merchant  and  doctor's  claims.  Go  to  his 
house,  and,  after  a  short  and  giddy  period,  that  his  wife  and  daughters  have 
flirted  about  the  country  in  their  calico  and  muslin  frocks,  what  a  scene  of 
discomfort  and  distress  is  presented  to  you  there !  What  the  individual 
family  of  Isaac  Shelby  is,  I  wish  to  see  the  nation  in  the  aggregate  become. 
But  I  fear  we  shall  shortly  have  to  contemplete  its  resemblance  in  the  op- 
posite picture.  If  statesmen  would  carefully  observe  the  conduct  of  pri- 
vate individuals  in  the  management  of  their  own  affairs,  they  would  have 


ON   THE   PROTECTION   OF   HOME   INDUSTRY.  227 

much  surer  guides  in  promoting  the  interests  of  the  State,  than  the  vision- 
ary speculations  of  theoretical  writers. 

The  manufacturing  system  is  not  only  injurious  to  agriculture,  hut,  say 
its  opponents,  it  is  injurious  also  to  foreign  commerce.  We  ought  not  to 
conceal  from  ourselves  our  present  actual  position  in  relation  to  other 
powers.  During  the  protracted  war  which  has  so  long  convulsed  all 
Europe,  and  which  will  prohably  be  succeeded  by  a  long  peace,  we  trans- 
acted the  commercial  business  of  other  nations,  and  largely  shared  with 
England  the  carryiug  trade  of  the  world.  Now,  every  other  nation  is 
anxiously  endeavoring  to  transact  its  own  business,  to  rebuild  its  marine, 
and  to  foster  its  navigation.  The  consequence  of  the  former  state  of 
things  was,  that  our  mercantile  marine,  and  our  commercial  employment 
were  enormously  disproportionate  to  the  exchangeable  domestic  produce 
of  our  country.  And  the  result  of  the  latter  will  be,  that,  as  exchanges 
between  this  country  and  other  nations  will  hereafter  consist  principally, 
on  our  part,  of  our  domestic  produce,  that  marine  and  that  employ- 
ment will  be  brought  down  to  what  is  necessary  to  effect  those  ex- 
changes. I  regret  exceedingly  this  reduction.  I  wish  the  mercantile  class 
could  enjoy  the  same  extensive  commerce  that  they  formerly  did.  But, 
if  they  can  not,  it  would  be  a  folly  to  repine  at  what  is  irrecoverably  lost, 
and  we  should  seek  rather  to  adapt  ourselves  to  the  new  circumstances  in 
which  we  find  ourselves.  If,  as  I  think,  we  have  reached  the  maximum 
of  our  foreign  demand  for  our  three  great  staples,  cotton,  tobacco,  and 
flour,  no  man  will  contend  that  we  should  go  on  to  produce  more  and 
more,  to  be  sent  to  the  glutted  foreign  market,  and  consumed  by  devouring 
expenses,  merely  to  give  employment  to  our  tonnage  and  to  our  foreign 
commerce.  It  would  be  extremely  unwise  to  accommodate  our  industry 
to  produce,  not  what  is  wanted  abroad,  but  cargoes  for  our  unemployed 
ships.  I  would  give  our  foreign  trade  every  legitimate  encouragement, 
and  extend  it  whenever  it  can  be  extended  profitably.  Hitherto  it  has 
been  stimulated  too  highly,  by  the  condition  of  the  world,  and  our  own 
policy  acting  on  that  condition.  And  we  are  reluctant  to  believe  that  we 
must  submit  to  its  necessary  abridgment.  The  habits  of  trade,  the  tempt- 
ing instances  of  enormous  fortunes  which  have  been  made  by  the  success- 
ful prosecution  of  it,  are  such,  that  we  turn  with  regret  from  its  pursuit ; 
we  still  cherish  a  lingering  hope ;  we  persuade  ourselves  that  somethiug 
will  occur,  how  and  what  it  may  be,  we  know  not,  to  revive  its  former 
activity ;  and  we  would  push  into  every  untried  channel,  grope  through 
the  Dardanelles  into  the  Black  Sea,  to  restore  its  former  profits.  I  repeat 
it,  let  us  proclaim  to  the  people  of  the  United  States  the  incontestable 
truth,  that  our  foreign  trade  must  be  circumscribed  by  the  altered  state  of 
the  world ;  and,  leaving  it  in  the  possession  of  all  the  gains  which  it  can 
now  possibly  make,  let  us  present  motives  to  the  capital  and  labor  of  our 
country,  to  employ  themselves  in  fabrication  at  home.  There  is  no  danger 
that,  by  a  withdrawal  of  that  portion  which  is  unprofitably  employed  on 


228  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

other  objects,  and  an  application  of  it  to  fabrication,  our  agriculture  would  be 
too  much  cramped.  The  produce  of  it  will  always  come  up  to  the  foreign 
demand.  Such  are  the  superior  allurements  belonging  to  the  cultivation 
of  the  soil  to  all  other  branches  of  industry,  that  it  will  always  be  preferred 
when  it  can  profitably  be  followed.  The  foreign  demand  will,  in  any  con- 
ceivable state  of  things,  limit  the  amount  of  the  exportable  produce  of 
agriculture.  The  amount  of  our  exportations  will  form  the  measure  of 
our  importations,  and  whatever  these  may  be,  they  will  constitute  the  basis 
of  the  revenue  derivable  from  customs. 

The  manufacturing  system  is  favorable  to  the  maintenance  of  peace. 
Foreign  commerce  is  the  great  source  of  foreign  wars.  The  eagerness 
with  which  we  contend  for  every  branch  of  it,  the  temptations  which  it 
offers,  operating  alike  upon  us  and  our  foreign  competitors,  produce  con- 
stant collisions.  No  country  on  earth,  by  the  extent  of  its  superfices,  the 
richness  of  its  soil,  the  variety  of  its  climate,  contains  within  its  own  limits 
more  abundant  facilities  for  supplying  all  our  rational  wants  than  ours 
does.  It  is.  not  necessary  or  desirable,  however,  to  cut  oft'  all  intercourse 
with  foreign  powers.  But,  after  securing  a  supply,  within  ourselves,  of 
all  the  great  essentials  of  life,  there  will  be  ample  scope  still  left  for  pre- 
serving such  an  intercourse.  If  we  had  no  intercourse  with  foreign  states, 
if  we  adopted  the  policy  of  China,  we  should  have  no  external  wars. 
And  in  proportion  as  we  diminish  our  dependence  upon  them,  shall  we 
lessen  the  danger  of  the  recurrence  of  war.  Our  late  war  would  not  have 
existed  if  the  counsels  of  the  manufacturers  in  England  had  been  listened 
to.  They  finally  did  prevail,  in  their  steady  and  persevering  effort  to  pro- 
duce a  repeal  of  the  orders  in  Council ;  but  it  was  too  late  to  prevent  the 
war.  Those  who  attribute  to  the  manufacturing  system  the  burdens  and 
misfortunes  of  that  country,  commit  a  great  error.  These  were  probably 
a  joint  result  of  the  operation  of  the  whole  of  her  systems,  and  the  larger 
share  of  it  was  to  be  ascribed  to  her  foreign  commerce,  and  to  the  ambi- 
tion of  her  rulers,  than  to  any  other  cause.  The  war  of  our  Revolution, 
in  which  that  ambition  displayed  its  monstrous  arrogance  and  preten- 
sions, laid  the  broad  foundation  of  that  enormous  debt  under  which  she 
now  groans. 
j  The  tendency  of  reasonable  encouragement  to  our  home  industry  is  fav- 
orable to  the  preservation  and  strength  of  our  confederacy.  Now  our  con- 
nection is  merely  political.  For  the  sale  of  the  surplus  of  the  produce  of 
our  agricultural  labor,  all  eyes  are  constantly  turned  upon  the  markets  of 
Liverpool.  There  is  scarcely  any  of  that  beneficial  intercourse,  the  best 
basis  of  political  connection,  which  consists  in  the  exchange  of  the  pro- 
duce of  our  labor.  On  our  maritime  frontier  there  has  been  too  much 
stimulus,  an  unnatural  activity ;  in  the  great  interior  of  the  country,  there 
exists  a  perfect  paralysis.  Encourage  fabrication  at  home,  and  there  will 
instantly  arise  animation  and  a  healthful  circulation  throughout  all  the  parts 
of  the  republic.     The  cheapness,  fertility,  and  quantity  of  our  waste  lands, 


ON   THE   PROTECTION   OF   HOME    INDUSTRY.  229 

offer  such  powerful  inducements  to  cultivation,  that  our  countrymen  are 
constantly  engaging  in  it.  I  would  not  check  this  disposition,  by  hard 
terms  in  the  sale  of  it.  Let  it  be  easily  accessible  to  all  who  wish  to  ac- 
quire it.  But  I  would  countervail  this  predilection,  by  presenting  to  cap- 
ital and  labor  motives  for  employment  in  other  branches  of  industry. 
Nothino-  is  more  uncertain  than  the  pursuit  of  agriculture,  when  we  mainly 
rely  upon  foreign  markets  for  the  sale  of  its  surplus  produce.  In  the  first 
place,  it  is  impossible  to  determine,  a  priori  the  amount  of  this  surplus  ; 
and,  in  the  secoud,  it  is  equally  impossible  to  anticipate  the  extent  of  the 
foreign  demand.  Both  the  one  and  the  other  depend  upon  the  seasons. 
From  the  fluctuations  incident  to  these,  and  from  other  causes,  it  may  hap- 
pen that  the  supplying  country  will,  for  a  long  series  of  years,  have  em- 
ployed a  larger  share  of  its  capital  and  labor  than  is  wise,  in  production, 
to  supply  the  wants  of  the  consuming  countries,  without  becoming  sensi- 
ble of  its  defect  of  policy.  The  failure  of  a  crop,  or  the  failure  of  a  mar- 
ket, does  not  discourage  the  cultivator.  He  renews  his  labors  another  year, 
and  he  renews  his  hopes.  It  is  otherwise  with  manufacturing  industry. 
The  precise  quantum  of  its  produce,  at  least,  can  with  some  accuracy  be 
previously  estimated.  And  the  wauts  of  foreign  countries  can  be  with 
some  probability  anticipated. 

I  am  sensible,  Mr.  Chairman,  if  I  have  even  had  a  success,  which  I  dare 
not  presume,  in  the  endeavor  I  have  been  making  to  show  that  sound  pol- 
icy requires  a  diversion  of  so  much  of  the  capital  and  labor  of  this  country 
from  other  employments  as  may  be  necessary,  by  a  different  application  of 
them,  to  secure,  within  ourselves,  a  steady  and  adequate  supply  of  the  great 
necessaries  of  life,  I  shall  have  only  established  one  half  of  what  is  incum- 
bent upon  me  to  prove.  It  will  still  be  required  by  the  other  side,  that  a 
second  proposition  be  supported,  and  that  is,  that  government  ought  to 
present  motives  for  such  a  diversion  and  new  application  of  labor  and  cap- 
ital, by  that  species  of  protection  which  the  tariff  holds  out.  Gentlemen 
say,  We  agree  with  you ;  you  are  right  in  your  first  proposition  ;  but,  "  let 
things  alone,"  and  they  will  come  right  in  the  end.  Now,  I  agree  with  them, 
that  things  would  ultimately  get  right ;  but  not  until  after  a  long  period 
of  disorder  and  distress,  terminating  in  the  impoverishment,  and  perhaps 
ruin,  of  the  country.  Dissolve  government,  reduce  it  to  its  primitive  ele- 
ments, and  without  any  general  effort  to  reconstruct  it,  there  would  arise, 
out  of  the  anarchy  which  would  ensue,  partial  combinations  for  the  pur- 
pose of  individual  protection,  which  would  finally  lead  to  a  social  form, 
competent  to  the  conservation  of  peace  within,  and  the  repulsion  of  force 
from  without.  Yet  no  one  would  say,  in  such  a  state  of  anarchy,  Let 
things  alone  !  If  gentlemen,  by  their  favorite  maxim,  mean  only  that, 
within  the  bosom  of  the  State,  things  are  to  be  left  alone,  and  each  indi- 
vidual, and  each  branch  of  industry,  allowed  to  pursue  their  respective  in- 
terests, without  giving  a  preference  to  either,  I  subscribe  to  it.  But  if  they 
give  it  a  more  comprehensive  import ;  if  they  require  that  things  be  left 


230  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

alone,  in  respect  not  only  to  interior  action,  but  to  exterior  action  also  ;  not 
only  as  regards  the  operation  of  our  own  government  upon  the  mass  of 
the  interests  of  the  State,  but  as  it  relates  to  the  operation  of  foreign  gov- 
ernments upon  that  mass,  I  dissent  from  it. 

In  this  maxim,  in  this  enlarged  sense,  it  is  indeed  everywhere  pro- 
claimed ;  but  nowhere  practiced.  It  is  truth  in  the  books  of  European 
political  economists.  It  is  error  in  the  practical  code  of  every  European 
State.  It  is  not  applied  where  it  is  most  applicable  ;  it  is  attempted  to  be 
introduced  here,  where  it  is  least  applicable ;  and  even  here  its  friends 
propose  to  limit  it  to  the  single  branch  of  manufacturing  industry,  while 
every  other  interest  is  encouraged  and  protected  according  to  the  policy  of 
Europe.  The  maxim  would  best  suit  Europe,  when  each  interest  is  ad- 
justed and  arranged  to  every  other,  by  causes  operating  during  many 
centuries.  Every  thing  there  has  taken  and  preserved  its  ancient  position. 
The  house  that  was  built  centuries  ago,  is  occupied  by  the  descendants  of 
its  original  constructor.  If  one  could  rise  up  after  the  lapse  of  ages,  and 
enter  a  European  shop,  he  would  see  the  same  hammer  at  work,  on  the 
same  anvil  or  last,  and  almost  by  the  same  hand.  There  every  thing  has 
found  its  place  and  level,  and  every  thing,  one  would  think,  might  there 
safely  be  left  alone.  But  the  policy  of  the  European  States  is  otherwise. 
Here  every  thing  is  naw  and  unfixed.  Neither  the  State,  nor  the  indivi- 
duals who  compose  it,  have  settled  down  in  their  permanent  positions. 
There  is  a  constant  tendency,  in  consequence  of  the  extent  of  our  public 
domain,  toward  production  for  foreign  markets.  The  maxim,  in  the  com- 
prehensive sense  in  which  I  am  considering  it,  requires,  to  entitle  it  to  ob- 
servation, two  conditions,  neither  of  which  exists.  First,  that  there  should 
be  perpetual  peace,  and  secondly,  that  the  maxim  should  be  everywhere 
respected.  When  war  breaks  out,  that  free  and  general  circulation  of  the 
produce  of  industry  among  the  nations  which  it  recommends,  is  interrupt- 
ed, and  the  nation  that  depends  upon  a  foreign  supply  for  its  necessaries, 
must  be  subjected  to  the  greatest  inconvenience.  If  it  be  not  everywhere 
observed,  there  will  be,  between  the  nation  that  does  not,  and  the  nation 
that  does,  conform  to  it,  an  inequality  alike  condemned  by  honor  and  by 
interest.  If  there  be  no  reciprocity  ;  if,  on  the  one  side,  there  is  perfect 
freedom  of  trade,  and  on  the  other  a  code  of  odious  restrictions,  will 
gentlemen  still  contend  that  we  are  to  submit  to  such  an  unprofitable  and 
degrading  intercourse  ?  Will  they  require  that  we  shall  act  upon  the 
social  system,  while  every  other  power  acts  upon  the  selfish  ?  Will  they 
demand  of  us  to  throw  widely  open  our  ports  to  every  nation,  while  all 
other  nations  entirely  or  partly  exclude  theirs  against  our  productions  ?  It 
is,  indeed,  possible,  that  some  pecuniary  advantage  might  be  enjoyed  by 
our  country  in  prosecuting  the  remnant  of  the  trade  which  the  contracted 
policy  of  other  powers  leaves  to  us.  But  what  security  is  there  for  our 
continuing  to  enjoy  even  that  ?  And  is  national  honor,  is  national  inde- 
pendence, to  count  as  nothing  ?     I  will  not  enter  into  a  detail  of  the  re- 


ON    THE    PROTECTION    OF    HOME    INDUSTRY.  231 

strictions  with  which  we  are  everywhere  presented  in  foreign  countries. 
I  will  content  myself  with  asserting  that  they  take  nothing  from  us  which 
they  can  produce  themselves,  upon  even  worse  terms  than  we  could  supply 
them.  Take,  again,  as  an  example,  the  English  corn-laws.  America  pre- 
sents the  image  of  a  fine,  generous-hearted  young  fellow,  who  has  just 
come  to  the  possession  of  a  rich  estate — an  estate,  which,  however,  requires 
careful  management.  He  makes  nothing;  he  buys  everything.  He  is 
surrounded  by  a  parcel  of  Jews,  each  holding  out  his  hand  with  a  packet 
of  buttons  or  pins,  or  some  other  commodity,  for  sale.  If  he  asks  those 
Jews  to  buy  any  thing  which  his  estate  produces,  they  tell  him  no  ;  it  is 
not  for  our  interest ;  it  is  not  for  yours.  Take  this  new  book,  says  one  of 
them,  on  political  economy,  and  you  will  there  perceive  it  is  for  your  in- 
terest to  buy  from  us,  and  to  let  things  alone  in  your  own  country.  The 
gentleman  from  Virginia,  to  whom  I  have  already  referred,  has  surrendered 
the  whole  argument,  in  the  example  of  the  East  India  trade.  He  thinks 
that  because  India  takes  nothing  but  specie  from  us,  because  there  is  not  a 
reciprocal  exchange  between  us  and  India,  of  our  respective  productions, 
that  the  trade  ought  to  be  discontinued.  Now  I  do  not  agree  with  him, 
that  it  ought  to  be  abandoned,  though  I  would  put  it  under  considerable 
restrictions,  when  it  comes  in  competition  with  the  fabrics  of  our  own 
country.  If  the  want  of  entire  reciprocity  be  a  sufficient  ground  for  the 
total  abandonment  of  a  particular  branch  of  trade,  the  same  principle  re- 
quires that,  where  there  are  some  restrictions  on  the  other  side,  they 
should  be  countervailed  by  equal  restrictions  on  the  other. 

But  this  maxim,  according  to  which  gentlemen  would  have  us  abandon 
the  home  industry  of  the  country,  to  the  influence  of  the  restrictive  sys- 
tems of  other  countries,  without  an  effort  to  protect  and  preserve  it,  is  not 
itself  observed  by  the  same  gentlemen,  in  regard  to  the  great  interests 
of  the  nation.  We  protect  our  fisheries  by  bounties  and  drawbacks.  We 
protect  our  tonnage,  by  excluding  or  restricting  foreign  tonnage,  exactly  as 
our  tonnage  is  excluded  or  restricted  by  foreign  States.  We  passed,  a  year 
or  two  ago,  the  bill  to  prohibit  British  navigation  from  the  West  India 
colonies  of  that  power  to  the  United  States,  because  onrs  is  shut  out  from 
them.  The  session  prior  to  the  passage  of  that  law,  the  gentleman  from 
South  Carolina  and  I,  almost  alone,  urged  the  House  to  pass  it.  But  the 
subject  was  postponed  until  the  next  session,  when  it  was  passed  by  nearly 
a  unanimous  vote,  the  gentleman  from  South  Carolina,  and  the  two  gentle- 
men from  Virginia  (Messrs.  Barbour  and  Tyler)  voting  with  the  majority. 
We  have  now  upon  our  table  other  bills  connected  with  that  object,  and 
proposing  restriction  upon  the  French  tonnage  to  countervail  theirs  upon 
ours.  I  shall,  with  pleasure,  vote  for  these  measures.  We  protect  our 
foreign  trade  by  consuls,  by  foreign  ministers,  by  embargoes,  by  non-inter- 
course, by  a  navy,  by  fortifications,  by  squadrons  constantly  acting  abroad, 
by  war,  and  by  a  variety  of  commercial  regulations  in  our  statute-book. 
The  whole  system  of  the  general  government,  from  its  first  formation  to 


232  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

the  present  time,  consists,  almost  exclusively,  in  one  unremitting  endeavor 
to  nourish,  and  protect,  and  defend  the  foreign  trade.  Why  have  not  all 
these  great  interests  been  left  to  the  operation  of  the  gentlemen's  favorite 
maxim  ?  Sir,  it  is  perfectly  right  that  we  should  have  afforded  this  pro- 
tection. And  it  is  perfectly  right,  in  my  humble  opinion,  that  we  should 
extend  the  principle  to  the  home  industry.  I  am  a  friend  to  fofeign  trade, 
but  I  protest  against  its  being  the  monopolist  of  all  the  parental  favor  and 
care  of  this  government. 

But,  sir,  friendly  as  I  am  to  the  existence  of  domestic  manufactures,  I 
would  not  give  to  them  unreasonable  encouragement,  by  protecting  duties. 
Their  growth  ought  to  be  gradual  but  sure.  I  believe  all  the  circum- 
stances of  the  present  period  highly  favorable  to  their  success.  But  they 
are  the  youngest  and  the  weakest  interest  of  the  State.  Agriculture  wants 
but  little  or  no  protection  against  the  regulations  of  foreign  powers.  The 
advantages  of  our  position,  and  the  cheapness,  and  abundance,  and  fertility 
of  our  land,  afford  to  that  greatest  interest  of  the  State  almost  all  the  pro- 
tection it  wants.  As  it  should  be,  it  is  strong  and  flourishing ;  or,  if  it 
be  not,  at  this  moment,  prosperous,  it  is  not  because  its  produce  is  not 
ample,  but  because,  depending,  as  we  do  altogether,  upon  a  foreign  maiket 
for  the  sale  of  the  surplus  of  that  produce,  the  foreign  market  is  glutted. 
Our  foreign  trade,  having  almost  exclusively  engrossed  the  protecting  care 
of  government,  wants  no  further  legislative  aid.  Aud,  whatever  depres- 
sion it  may  now  experience,  it  is  attributable  to  causes  beyond  the  control 
of  this  government.  The  abundance  of  capital,  indicated  by  the  avidity 
with  which  loans  are  sought,  at  the  reduced  rate  of  five  per  centum  ;  the 
reduction  in  the  wages  of  labor,  and  the  decline  in  the  price  of  property 
of  every  kind,  as  well  as  that  of  agricultural  produce,  all  concur  favorably 
for  domestic  manufactures.  Now,  as  when  we  arranged  the  existing  tariff, 
is  the  auspicious  moment  for  government  to  step  in  and  cheer  and  counte- 
nance them.  We  did  too  little  then,  and  I  endeavored  to  warn  this  House 
of  the  effects  of  inadequate  protection.  We  were  called  upon,  at  that 
time,  by  the  previous  pledges  we  had  given,  by  the  inundation  of  foreign 
fabrics,  which  was  to  be  anticipated  from  their  free  admission  after  the  term- 
ination of  the  war,  and  by  the  lasting  interests  of  this  country,  to  give 
them  efficient  support.  We  did  not  do  it ;  but  let  us  not  now  repeat  the 
error.  Our  great  mistake  has  been  in  the  irregularity  of  the  action  of  the 
measures  of  this  government  upon  manufacturing  industry.  At  one  period 
it  is  stimulated  too  high,  and  then,  by  an  opposite  course  of  policy,  it  is 
precipitated  into  a  condition  of  depression  too  low.  First  there  came  the 
embargo;  then  non- intercourse,  and  other  restrictive  measures  followed; 
and  finally,  that  greatest  of  all  stimuli  to  domestic  fabrication,  war. 
During  all  that  long  period  we  were  adding  to  the  positive  effect  of  the 
measures  of  government,  all  the  moral  encouragement  which  results  from 
popular  resolves,  legislative  resolves,  and  other  manifestations  of  the  public 
will  and  the  public  wish  to  foster  our  home  manufactures,  and  to  render 


ON    THE    PROTECTION    OF    HOME    INDUSTRY.  233 

our  confederacy  independent  of  foreign  powers.  The  peace  ensued,  and 
the  country  was  flooded  with  the  fabrics  of  other  countries  ;  and  we,  for- 
getting all  our  promises,  coolly  and  philosophically  talk  of  leaving  things 
to  themselves — making  up  our  deficiency  of  practical  good  sense,  by  the 
stores  of  learning  which  we  collect  from  theoretical  writers.  I,  too,  some- 
times amuse  myself  with  the  visions  of  these  writers  (as  I  do  with  those 
of  metaphysicians  and  novelists),  and,  if  I  do  not  forget,  one  of  the  best 
among  them  enjoins  it  upon  a  country  to  protect  its  industry  against  the 
injurious  influence  of  the  prohibitions  and  restrictions  of  foreign  countries, 

which  operate  upon  it.  -— ' — --< 

Monuments  of  the  melancholy  effects  upon  our  manufactures,  and  of  the 
fluctuating  policy  of  the  councils  of  the  Union  in  regard  to  them,  abound 
in  all  parts  of  the  country.  Villages,  and  parts  of  villages,  which  sprang 
up  but  yesterday  in  the  western  country,  under  the  excitement  to  which  I 
have  referred,  have  dwindled  into  decay,  and  are  abandoned.  In  New 
England,  in  passing  along  the  highway,  one  frequently  sees  large  and 
spacious  buildings,  with  the  glass  broken  out  of  the  windows,  the  shutters 
hanging  in  ruinous  disorder,  without  any  appearance  of  activity,  and  en- 
veloped in  solitary  gloom.  Upon  inquiring  what  they  are,  you  are  almost 
always  informed  that  they  were  some  cotton  or  other  factory,  which  their 
proprietors  could  no  longer  keep  in  motion  against  the  overwhelming  press- 
ure of  foreign  competition.  Gentlemen  ask  for  facts  to  show  the  expe- 
diency and  propriety  of  extending  protection  to  our  manufactures.  Do 
they  want  stronger  evidence  than  the  condition  of  things  I  have  pointed 
out  ?  They  ask,  why  the  manufacturing  industry  is  not  resumed  under 
the  encouraging  auspices  of  the  present  time  ?  Sir,  the  answer  is  obvious, 
there  is  a  general  dismay  ;  there  is  a  want  of  heart ;  there  is  the  greatest 
moral  discouragement  experienced  throughout  the  nation.  A  man  who 
engages  in  the  manufacturing  business  is  thought  by  his  friends  to  be  de- 
ranged. Who  will  go  to  the  ruins  of  Carthage  or  Baalbec  to  rebuild  a 
city  there  ?  Let  government  commence  a  systematic  but  moderate  support 
of  this  important  branch  of  our  industry  ;  let  it  announce  its  fixed  pur- 
pose, that  the  protection  of  manufactures  against  the  influence  of  the 
measures  of  foreign  governments,  will  enter  into  the  scope  of  our  national 
policy  ;  let  us  substitute,  for  the  irregular  action  of  our  measures,  one  that 
shall  be  steady  and  uniform;  and  hope,  and  animation,  and  activity,  will 
again  revive.  The  gentleman  from  South  Carolina  (Mr.  Lowndes)  ottered 
a  resolution,  which  the  House  rejected,  having  for  its  object  to  ascertain 
the  profits  now  made  upon  capital  employed  in  manufacturing.  It  is  not, 
I  repeat  it,  the  individuals,  but  the  interests  we  wish  to  have  protected. 
From  the  infinite  variety  of  circumstances  under  which  different  manufac- 
turing establishments  are  situated,  it  is  impossible  that  any  information 
such  as  the  gentleman  desires,  could  be  obtained,  that  ought  to  guide  the 
judgment  of  this  House.  It  may  happen  that,  of  two  establishments  en- 
gaged in  the  same  species  of  fabrication,  one  will  be  prospering  and  the 


234  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

other  languishing.  Take  the  example  of  the  Waltham  manufactory  near 
Boston,  and  that  of  Brunswick  in  Maine.  The  former  has  the  advantage 
of  a  fine  water  situation,  a  manager  of  excellent  information,  enthusias- 
tically devoted  to  its  success,  a  machinist  of  most  inventive  genius,  who  is 
constantly  making  some  new  improvement,  and  who  has  carried  the  water 
loom  to  a  degree  of  perfection  which  it  has  not  attained  in  England — to 
such  perfection  as  to  reduce  the  cost  of  weaving  a  yard  of  cloth  adapted 
to  shirting  to  less  than  a  cent — while  it  is  abundantly  supplied  with  cap- 
ital by  several  rich  capitalists  in  Boston.  These  gentlemen  have  the  most 
extensive  correspondence  with  all  parts  of  the  United  States.  Owing  to 
this  extraordinary  combination  of  favorable  circumstances,  the  Waltham 
establishment  is  doing  pretty  well ;  while  that  of  Brunswick,  not  possess- 
ing all  of  them,  but  perhaps  as  many  as  would  enable  it,  under  adequate 
protection,  to  flourish,  is  laboring  arduously.  Will  gentlemen  infer,  from 
the  success  of  a  few  institutions  having  peculiar  advantages,  which  form 
exceptions  to  the  languishing  condition  of  manufacturing  industry,  that 
there  exists  no  necessity  for  protection  ?  In  the  most  discouraging  state 
of  trade  and  navigation,  there  are,  no  doubt,  always  some  individuals  who 
are  successful  in  prosecuting  them.  Would  it  be  fair  to  argue,  from  these 
instances,  against  any  measure  brought  forward  to  revive  their  activity  ? 

The  gentleman  from  Massachusetts  (Mr.  Whitman)  has  manifested  pe- 
culiar hostility  to  the  tariff,  and  has  allowed  himself  to  denominate  it  a 
mad,  quixotic,  ruinous  scheme.  The  gentleman  is  dissatisfied  with  the  quar- 
ter— the  west — from  which  it  emanates.  To  ffive  higher  tone  and  more 
effect  to  the  gentleman's  declamation,  which  is  vague  and  indefinite,  he  has 
even  assumed  a  new  place  in  this  House.  Sir,  I  would  advise  the  gentle- 
man to  return  to  his  ancient  position,  moral  and  physical.  It  was  respect- 
able and  useful.  The  honorable  gentleman  professes  to  be  a  friend  to  man- 
ufacturers !  And  yet  he  has  found  an  insurmountable  constitutional 
impediment  to  their  encouragement,  of  which,  as  no  other  gentleman  has 
relied  upon  it,  I  shall  leave  him  in  the  undisturbed  possession.  The  hon- 
orable gentleman  a  friend  to  manufacturers  !  And  yet  he  has  delivered  a 
speech,  marked  with  peculiar  emphasis,  against  their  protection.  The  hon- 
orable gentleman  a  friend  to  manufacturers  !  And  yet  he  requires,  if  this 
constitutional  difficulty  could  be  removed,  such  an  arrangement  of  the  tar- 
iff as  shall  please  him,  although  every  one  else  should  be  dissatisfied.  The 
intimation  is  not  new  of  the  presumptuousness  of  western  politicians,  in 
endeavoring  to  give  to  the  policy  of  this  country  such  a  direction  as  will 
assert  its  honor  and  sustain  its  interests.  It  was  first  made  while  the  mea- 
sures preparatory  to  the  late  war  were  under  consideration,  and  it  now 
probably  emanates  from  the  same  quarter.  The  predilection  of  the  school 
of  the  Essex  junto  for  foreign  trade  and  British  fabrics — I  am  far  from  in- 
sinuating that  other  gentlemen  who  are  opposed  to  the  tariff  are  actuated 
by  any  such  spirit — is  unconquerable.  We  disregarded  the  intimation  when 
it  was  first  made  ;  we  shall  be   uninfluenced  by  it  now.     If,  indeed,  there 


ON   THE    PROTECTION    OF    HOME    INDUSTRY.  235 

were  the  least  color  for  the  assertion,  that  the  foreign  trade  is  to  be  crushed 
by  the  tariff,  is  it  not  strange,  that  the  whole  of  the  representation  from  all 
our  great  commercial  metropolises  should  unite  to  destroy  it  ?  The  mem- 
ber from  Boston — to  whose  rational  and  disinterested  course  I  am  happy, 
on  this,  as  on  many  other  occasions,  to  be  able  to  testify — the  representa- 
tives from  the  city  of  New  York,  from  Philadelphia,  from  Baltimore,  all 
entered  into  this  confederacy,  to  destroy  it,  by  supporting  this  mad  and 
ruinous  scheme.  Some  gentlemen  assert  that  it  is  too  comprehensive. 
But  its  chief  recommendation  to  me  is,  that  it  leaves  no  important  interest 
unprovided  for. 

The  same  gentleman,  or  others,  if  it  had  been  more  limited,  would  have 
objected  to  its  partial  operation.     The  general  measure  of  the  protection 
which  it  communicates,  is  pronounced  to  be  immoderate  and  enormous. 
Yet  no  one  ventures  to  enter  into  a  specification  of  the  particular  articles 
of  which  it  is  composed,  to  show  that  it  deserves  thus  to  be  characterized. 
The  article   of  molasses  has,  indeed,  been  selected,  and  held  up  as  an  in- 
stance of  the  alleged  extravagance.     The  existing  tariff  imposes  a  duty  of 
five  cents,  the  proposed  tariff  ten  cents  per  gallon.     We  tax  foreign  spirits 
very  high,  and  yet  we  let  in,  with  a  very  low  duty,  foreign  molasses,  which 
ought  to  be  considered  as  rum  in  disguise,  filling  the  space  of  so  much  do- 
mestic spirits.     If  (which  I  do  not  believe  will  immediately  be  the  case,  to 
any  considerable  extent)  the  manufacture  of  spirits  from  molasses,  should 
somewhat  decline  under  the  new  tariff,  the  manufacture  of  spirits  from  the 
raw  material,  produced  at  home,  will  be  extended  in  the  same  ratio.     Be- 
sides the  incidental  advantage  of  increasing  our  security  against  the  effect 
of  seasons  of  scarcity,  by  increasing  the  distillation  of  spirits  from  grain, 
there  is  scarcely  any  item  in  the  tariff  which  combines  so  many  interests 
in  supporting  the  proposed  rate  of  duty.     The  grain-growing  country,  the 
fruit  country,  and  the  culture  of  cane,  would  be  all  benefited  by  the  duty. 
Its  operation  is  said,  however,  to  be  injurious  to   a  certain  quarter  of  the 
Union.     It  is  not  to  be  denied,  that  each  particular  section  of  the  country 
will  feel  some  one  or  more  articles  of  the  tariff  to  bear  hard  upon  it,  dur- 
ing a  short  period ;  but  the  compensation  is  to  be  found  in  the  more  favor- 
able operation   of  others.     Now  I   am  fully  persuaded   that,  in  the  first 
instance,  no  part  of  the  Union  would  share  more  largely  than  New  En- 
gland, in  the  aggregate  of  the  benefits  resulting  from  the  tariff.     But  the 
habits  of  economy  of  her  people,  their  industry,  their  skill,  their  noble  en- 
terprise, the  stimulating  effects  of  their  more  rigorous  climate,  all  tend  to 
insure  to  her  the  first  and  the  richest  fruits  of  the  tariff.     The  middle  and 
the  western   States  will  come  in  afterward  for  their  portion,  and   all  will 
participate  in  the  advantage  of  internal  exchanges  and  circulation.     No 
quarter  of  the  Union  will   urge  with  a  worse  grace  than   New   England, 
objections  to  a  measure,  having  for  its  object  the  advancement  of  the  in- 
terests of  the  whole  ;  for  no  quarter  of  the  Union  participates  more  exten- 
sively in  the  benefits  flowing  from  the  general  government.     Her  tonnage, 


236  SPEECHES    OF    HENKY    CLAY. 

her  fisheries,  her  foreign  trade,  have  been  constantly  objects  of  federal  care. 
There  is  expended  the  greatest  portion  of  the  public  revenue.  The  build- 
ing of  the  public  ships ;  their  equipments ;  the  expenses  incident  to  their 
remaining  in  port,  chiefly  take  place  there.  That  great  drain  on  the 
revenue,  the  revolutionary  pension  law,  inclines  principally  toward  New 
England.  I  do  not,  however,  complain  of  these  advantages  which  she 
enjoys.  She  is  probably  fairly  entitled  to  them.  But  gentlemen  from  that 
quarter  may,  at  least,  be  justly  reminded  of  them,  when  they  complain  of 
the  onerous  effect  of  one  or  two  items  of  the  tariff. 

Mr.  Chairman,  I  frankly  own  that  I  feel  great  solicitude  for  the  success 
of  this  bill.     The  entire  independence  of  my  country  of  all  foreign  States, 
as  it  respects  a  supply  of  our  essential  wants,  has  ever  been  with  me  a 
favorite  object.     The  war  of  our  Revolution  effected  our  political  emanci- 
pation.    The  last  war  contributed  greatly  toward  accomplishing  our  com- 
mercial freedom.     But  our  complete  independence  will  only  be  consum- 
mated after  the  policy  of  this  bill  shall  be  recognized  and  adopted.     We 
have,  indeed,  great  difficulties  to  contend  with — old  habits,  colonial  usages, 
the  obduracy  of  the  colonial  spirit,  the  enormous  profits  of  a  foreign  trade, 
prosecuted  under  favorable  circumstances,  which   no  longer  continue.     I 
will  not  despair ;  the  cause,  I  verily  believe,  is  the  cause  of  the  country.     It 
may  be  posponed ;  it  may  be   frustrated   for  the  moment,  but  it  must 
finally  prevail.     Let  us  endeavor  to  acquire  for  the  present  Congress  the 
merit  of  having  laid  this  solid  foundation  of  the  national  prosperity.     If, 
as  I  think,  fatally  for  the  public  interest,  the  bill  shall  be  defeated,  what 
will  be  the  character  of  the  account  which  we  shall  have  to  render  to  our 
constituents  upon  our  return  among  them  ?    We  shall  be  asked,  What  have 
you   done  to  remedy  the  disorders  of  the  public  currency  ?     Why,  Mr. 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury  made  us  a  long  report  on  that  matter,  containing 
much  valuable  information,  and  some  very  good  reasoning,  but,  upon  the 
whole,  we  found  that  subject  rather  above  our  comprehension,  and  we  con- 
cluded that  it  was  wisest  to  let  it  regulate  itself.     What  have  you  done  to 
supply  the  deficit  in  the  treasury  ?     We  thought  that,  although  you  are  all 
endeavoring  to  get  out  of  the  banks,  it  was  a  very  good  time  for  us  to  go 
into  them,  and  we  have  authorized  a  loan.     You  have  done  something 
then,  certainly,  on  the  subject  of  retrenchment.     Here,  at  home,  we   are 
practicing  the  greatest  economy,  and  our  daughters,  no  longer  able  to  wear 
calico  gowns,  are  obliged  to  put  on  homespun.     Why,  we  have  saved,  by 
the  indefatigable  exertions  of  a  member  from  Tennessee  (General  Cocke), 
fifty  thousand  dollars,  which  were  wanted  for  the  Yellow  Stone  expedition. 
No,  not  quite  so  much  ;  for  thirty  thousand  dollars  of  that  sum  were  still 
wanted,  although  we  stopped  the  expedition  at  the  Council  Bluffs.     And 
we  have  saved  another  sum,  which  we  hope  will  give  you  great  satisfac- 
tion.    After  nearly   two   days'  debate,  and    a  division  between  the  two 
Houses,  we  struck  oft'  two  hundred  dollars  from  the  salary  of  the  clerk  of 
the  Attorney  General.     What  have  you  done  to  protect  home  industry 


ON    THE    PROTECTION    OF    HOME    INDUSTRY.  237 

from  the  effects  of  the  contracted  policy  of  foreign  powers  ?  We  thought 
it  best,  after  much  deliberation,  to  leave  things  alone  at  home,  and  to  con- 
tinue our  encouragement  to  foreign  industry.  Well,  surely  you  have 
passed  some  law  to  reanimate  and  revive  the  hopes  of  the  numerous 
bankrupts  that  have  been  made  by  the  extraordinary  circumstances  of  the 
world,  and  the  ruinous  tendency  of  our  policy  ?  No  ;  the  Senate  could  not 
agree  on  that  subject,  and  the  bankrupt  bill  failed !  Can  we  plead,  sir, 
ignorance  of  the  general  distress,  and  of  the  ardent  wishes  of  the  com- 
munity for  that  protection  of  its  industry  which  this  bill  proposes  ?  No, 
sir,  almost  daily,  throughout  the  session,  have  we  been  receiving  petitions 
with  which  our  table  is  now  loaded,  humbly  imploring  us  to  extend  this 
protection.  Unanimous  resolutions  from  important  State  Legislatures  have 
called  upon  us  to  give  it,  and  the  people  of  whole  States  in  mass — almost 
in  mass,  of  New  York,  New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  and  Ohio — have  trans- 
mitted to  us  their  earnest  and  humble  petitions  to  encourage  the  home  in- 
dustry. Let  us  not  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  them.  Let  us  not  disappoint  their 
just  expectations.  Let  us  manifest,  by  the  passage  of  this  bill,  that  Con- 
gress does  not  deserve  the  reproaches  which  have  been  cast  on  it,  of  in- 
sensibility to  the  wants  and  sufferings  of  the  people. 


ON  SENDING  A  MINISTER  TO  SOUTH  AMERICA. 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OP  REPRESENTATIVES,  MAT  10,  1820. 

[Mr.  Clay  was  the  earliest  advocate  in  Christendom  for  the 
recognition  of  the  independence  of  the  South  American  States, 
and  had  labored  long  and  hard  in  this  cause  before  it  obtained 
favor  in  Congress,  or  with  the  administration.     Now,  however, 
in  1820,  it  was  said  that  the   President  of  the  United   States, 
Mr.  Monroe,  was  running  a  race  with  Mr.  Clay,  to  get  ahead  of 
him  in  appropriating  the  glory  of  this  movement.     As  President 
of  the  United  States,  Mr.  Monroe  certainly  had  the  advantage, 
inasmuch  as  a  favorable  disposition  in  him  toward  a  recogni- 
tion of  the  independence  of  those  States,  might  seem  to  have 
a  greater  official  consequence.     Nevertheless,   Mr.  Clay's  early 
zeal  in  this  cause,  and  his  persistency,  had  made  too  deep  an 
impression  on  the  public  mind  of  the  world  to  admit  of  a  rival. 
It  is  also  a  remarkable  fact,  that  Mr.  Canning,  the  British  prime 
minister,  claimed  to  have  called  a  new  wTorld  into  existence,  in 
having  moved  the  Cabinet  of  George  the  Fourth  to  recognize 
the  independence  of  Mexico,  Colombia,  and   Buenos  Ayrcs,   in 
1824.     But  Mr.  Clay  had  achieved  this,  through  the  American 
Congress,  in  ]  S22.    And  thus  Mr.  Canning  came  into  the  race  in 
company  with  Mr.  Monroe  ;  but  both  of  them  were  too  late  for 
the  honor  so  modestly  claimed.     The  South  American  patriots 
had  recognized  Mr.  Clay's  early  advocacy  of  their  cause,   had 
voted  him  thanks,  had  translated  his  speeches  and  circulated 
them,  had  erected  monuments  to  his  honor,  and  celebrated  his 
name  in  patriotic  songs.     It  was  sirnply  absurd  for  Mr.  Monroe, 
or  Mr.  Canning,  or  any  body  else,  to  attempt  to  rob  Mr.  Clay  of 
the  fame  acquired  by  his  early  and  disinterested   advocacy  of 
South  American  independence.     All  the  world  knows  that  he 
was  the  pioneer  in  this  philanthropic  enterprise.      Mr.  Clay's 
resolution  was  carried  by  a  vote  of  eighty  to  seventy-five,  which 
was  the  first  majority  obtained  in  Congress  for  this  object. 


ON    SENDING   A    MINISTER    TO    SOUTH    AMERICA.  239 

There  is  one  remarkable  passage  in  this  speech  of  Mr.  Clay, 
which,  if  it  had  been  uttered  by  him  twenty  years  later,  would 
have  stamped  him  at  the  South  as  an  Abolitionist  "  of  the 
straitest  sect."  It  is  this:  "Will  gentlemen  contend,"  said 
Mr.  Clay,  "  because  these  people  (the  South  Americans)  are  not 
like  us  in  all  particulars,  they  are  therefore  unfit  for  freedom  ? 
In  some  particulars,  he  ventured  to  say  that  the  people  of  South 
America  were  in  advance  of  us.  On  the  point  which  had  been 
so  much  discussed  on  this  floor,  during  the  present  session,  they 
were  greatly  in  advance  of  us  :  Granada,  Venezuela,  and  Bu- 
enos Ayrcs,  had  all  emancipated  their  slaves." 

The  House  being  in  committee  of  the  whole,  on  the  state  of  the  Union, 
and  a  motion  being  made  to  that  etfect,  the  committee  resolved  to  proceed 
to  the  consideration  of  the  following  resolutions  : 

Resolved,  That  it  is  expedient  to  provide  by  law  a  suitable  outfit  and 
salary  for  such  minister  or  ministers  as  the  president,  by  and  with  the  ad- 
vice and  consent  of  the  Senate,  may  send  to  any  of  the  governments  of 
South  America,  which  have  established,  and  are  maintaining,  their  inde- 
pendence of  Spain : 

Resolved,  That  provision  ought  to  be  made  for  requesting  the  President 
of  the  United  States  to  cause  to  be  presented  to  the  general,  the  most 
worthy  and  distinguished,  in  his  opinion,  in  the  service  of  any  of  the  inde- 
pendent governments  of  South  America,  the  sword  which  was  given  by 
the  viceroy  of  Lima  to  Captain  Biddle  of  the  Ontario,  during  her  late 
cruise  in  the  Pacific,  and  which  is  now  in  the  office  of  the  Department  of 
State,  with  the  expression  of  the  wish  of  the  Congress  of  the  United  States, 
that  it  may  be  employed  in  the  support  and  preservation  of  the  liberties 
and  independence  of  his  country. 

"When  Mr.  Clay  arose  and  said  :  It  is  my  intention,  Mr.  Chairman,  to 
withdraw  the  latter  resolution.  Since  I  offered  it,  this  House  (by  the  pas- 
sage of  the  bill  to  prevent,  under  suitable  penalties,  in  future,  the  acceptance 
of  presents,  forbidden  by  the  Constitution,  to  prohibit  the  carrying  of 
foreigners  in  the  public  vessels,  and  to  limit  to  the  case  of  our  own  citizens, 
and  to  regulate  in  that  case,  the  transportation  of  money  in  them),  has, 
perhaps,  sufficiently  animadverted  on  the  violation  of  the  Constitution, 
which  produced  that  resolution.  I  confess,  that  when  I  heard  of  Captain 
Biddle  receiving  from  the  deputy  of  a  king  the  sword  in  question,  I  felt 
greatly  mortified.  I  could  not  help  contrasting  his  conduct  with  that  of  the 
surgeon  on  board  an  American  man-of-war,  in  the  bay  of  Naples  (I  regret  that 
I  do  not  recollect  his  name,  as  I  should  like  to  record,  with  the  testimony 
which  I  with  pleasure  bear  to  his  high-minded  conduct),  who,  having  per- 
formed an  operation  on  one  of  the  suite  of  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  and 
being  offered  fifteen  hundred  pistoles  or  dollars  for  his  skillful  service,  re- 


240  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

turned  the  purse,  and  said,  that  what  he  had  done  was  the  cause  of  hu- 
manity, and  that  the  Constitution  of  his  country  forbade  his  acceptance  of 
the  proffered  boon.  There  was  not  an  American  heart  that  did  not  swell 
with  pride  on  hearing  of  his  noble  disinterestedness.  It  did  appear  to 
me,  also,  that  the  time  of  Captain  Biddle's  interposition  was  unfortunate 
to  produce  an  agreement  between  the  viceroy  of  Lima  and  Chili,  to  ex- 
change their  respective  prisoners,  however  desirable  the  accomplishment 
of  such  a  humane  object  might  be.  The  viceroy  had  constantly  refused 
to  consent  to  any  such  exchange.  And  it  is  an  incontestable  fact,  that  the 
barbarities  which  have  characterized  the  civil  war  in  Spanish  America  have 
uniformly  originated  with  the  royalists.  After  the  memorable  battle  of 
Maipu,  decisive  of  the  independence  of  Chili,  and  fatal  to  the  arms  of  the 
viceroy,  this  interposition,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  took  place.  The  trans- 
portation of  money,  upon  freight,  from  the  port  of  Callao  to  that  of  Rio 
Janeiro,  for  royalists,  appeared  to  me  also  highly  improper.  If  we  wish 
to  preserve,  unsullied,  the  illustrious  character,  which  our  navy  justly  sus- 
tains, we  should  repress  the  very  first  instances  of  irregularity.  But  I  am 
willing  to  believe  that  Captain  Biddle's  conduct  has  been  inadvertent.  He 
is  a  gallant  officer,  and  belongs  to  a  respectable  and  patriotic  family.  His 
errors,  I  am  persuaded,  will  not  be  repeated  by  him  or  imitated  by  others. 
And  I  trust  that  there  is  no  man  more  unwilling  than  I  am,  unnecessarily 
to  press  reprehension.  It  is  thought,  moreover,  by  some,  that  the  president 
might  feel  an  embarrassment  in  executing  the  duty  required  of  him  by  the 
resolution,  which  it  was  far  from  my  purpose  to  cause  him.     I  withdraw  it. 

There  is  no  connection  intended,  or  in  fact,  between  that  resolution  and 
the  one  I  now  propose  briefly  to  discuss.  The  proposition,  to  recognize 
the  independent  governments  of  South  America,  offers  a  subject  of  as 
great  importance  as  any  which  could  claim  the  deliberate  consideration  of 
this  House. 

Mr.  Clay  then  went  on  to  say,  that  it  appeared  to  him  the  object  of  this 
government,  heretofore,  had  been,  so  to  manage  its  affairs,  in  regard  to 
South  America,  as  to  produce  an  effect  on  its  existing  negotiations  with 
the  parent  country.  The  House  were  now  apprised,  by  the  message  from 
the  president,  that  this  policy  had  totally  failed ;  it  had  failed,  because  our 
country  would  not  dishonor  itself  by  surrendering  one  of  the  most  im- 
portant rights  incidental  to  sovereignty.  Although  we  had  observed  a 
course  toward  the  patriots,  as  Mr.  Gallatin  said,  in  his  communication  read 
yesterday,  greatly  exceeding  in  rigor  the  course  pursued  toward  them  either 
by  France  or  England  ;  although,  also,  as  was  remarked  by  the  Secretary  of 
State,  we  had  observed  a  neutrality  so  strict  that  blood  had  been  spilt  in 
enforcing  it ;  still,  Spanish  honor  was  not  satisfied,  and  fresh  sacrifices  were 
demanded  of  us.  If  they  were  not  resisted  in  form,  they  were  substan- 
tially yielded  by  our  course  as  to  South  America.  We  will  not  stipulate 
with  Spain  not  to  recognize  the  independence  of  the  south  ;  but  we  never- 
theless grant  her  all  she  demands. 


ON    SENDING    A    MINISTER    TO    SOUTH    AMERICA.  241 

Mr.  Clay  said,  it  had  been  his  intention  to  have  gone  into  a  general 
view  of  the  course  of  policy  which  has  characterized  the  general  govern- 
ment ;  but  on  account  of  the  lateness  of  the  session,  and  the  desire  for  an 
early  adjournment,  he  should  waive,  for  that  purpose,  and,  in  the  observa- 
tions he  had  to  make,  confine  himself  pretty  much  to  events  subsequent 
to  the  period  at  which  he  had  submitted  to  the  House  a  proposition  having 
nearly  the  same  object  as  this. 

After  the  return  of  our  commissioners  from  South  America ;  after  they 
had  all  agreed  in  attesting  the  fact  of  independent  sovereignty  being  ex- 
ercised by  the  government  of  Buenos  Ay  res ;  the  whole  nation  looked 
forward  to  the  recognition  of  the  independence  of  that  country,  as  the 
policy  which  the  government  ought  to  pursue.  He  appealed  to  every 
member  to  say,  whether  there  was  not  a  general  opinion,  in  case  the  report 
of  that  mission  should  turn  out  as  it  did,  that  the  recognition  of  the  inde- 
pendence of  that  government  would  follow,  as  a  matter  of  course.  The 
surprise  at  a  different  course  being  pursued  by  the  executive  at  the  last 
session,  was  proportionably  great.  On  this  subject,  so  strong  was  the  mes- 
sage of  the  president  at  the  commencement  of  the  present  session,  that 
some  of  the  presses  took  it  for  granted,  that  the  recognition  would  follow 
of  course,  and  a  paper  in  this  neighborhood  has  said  that  there  was,  in  re- 
gard to  that  question,  a  race  of  popularity  between  the  President  of  the 
United  States  and  the  humble  individual  who  now  addresses  the  House. 
Yet,  faithless  Ferdinand  refuses  to  ratify  his  own  treaty,  on  the  pretext 
of  violations  of  our  neutrality ;  but  in  fact,  because  we  will  not  basely  sur- 
render an  important  attribute  of  sovereignty.  Two  years  ago,  he  said, 
would,  in  his  opinion,  have  been  the  proper  time  for  recognizing  the  inde- 
pendence of  the  South.  Then  the  struggle  was  somewhat  doubtful,  and  a 
kind  office  on  the  part  of  this  government  would  have  had  a  salutary 
effect.  Since  that  period,  what  had  occurred  ?  Any  thing  to  prevent  a 
recognition  of  their  independence,  or  to  make  it  less  expedient  ?  No ; 
every  occurrence  tended  to  prove  the  capacity  of  that  country  to  maintain 
its  independence.  He  then  successively  adverted  to  the  battles  of  Maipu, 
and  Bojaca,  their  great  brilliancy,  and  their  important  consequences. 
Adverting  to  the  union  of  Venezuela  and  New  Granada  in  one  republic, 
he  said,  one  of  the  first  acts  was,  to  appoint  one  of  their  most  distinguished 
citizens,  the  vice  president  Zea,  a  minister  to  this  country.  There  was  a 
time,  he  said,  when  impressions  are  made  on  individuals  and  nations,  by 
kindness  toward  them,  which  lasts  forever,  when  they  are  surrounded 
with  enemies,  and  embarrassments  present  themselves.  Ages  and  ages 
may  pass  away,  said  he,  before  we  forget  the  help  we  received  in  our  day 
of  peril,  from  the  hands  of  France.  Her  injustice,  the  tyranny  of  her  des- 
pot, may  alienate  us  for  a  time ;  but,  the  moment  it  ceases,  we  relapse 
into  a  good  feeling  toward  her.  Do  you  mean  to  wait,  said  he,  until 
these  republics  are  recognized  by  the  whole  world,  and  then  step  in  and 
extend  your  hand  to  them,  when  it  can  no  longer  be  withheld  ?     If  we  are 

16 


242  SPEECHES    OF    HENKY    CLAY. 

to  believe  General  Vives,  we  have  gone  auout  among  foreign  powers,  and 
consulted  with  Lord  Castlereagh  and  Count  Nesselrode,  to  seek  some  aid 
In  recognizing  the  independence  of  these  powers.  What !  after  the  pres- 
ident has  told  us  that  the  recognition  of  the  independence*  of  nations  is 
an  incontestable  right  of  sovereignty,  shall  we  lag  behind  till  the  European 
powers  think  proper  to  advance  ?  The  president  has  assigned,  as  a  reason 
for  abstaining  from  the  recognition,  that  the  Congress  of  Aix-la-Chapelle 
might  take  offense  at  it.  So  far  from  such  an  usurped  interference  being  a 
reason  for  stopping,  he  would  have  exerted  the  right  the  sooner  for  it. 
But  the  Congress  of  Aix-la-Chapelle  had  refused  to  interfere,  and  on  that 
point  the  president  was  mistaken.  Spain,  it  was  true,  had  gone  about  beg- 
ging the  nations  of  Europe  not  to  interfere  in  behalf  of  the  South  Amer- 
icans ;  but  the  wishes  of  the  whole  unbiassed  world  must  be  in  their  favor. 
And  while  wo  had  gone  on,  passing  neutrality  bill  after  neutrality  bill,  and 
bills  to  punish  piracy — with  respect  to  unquestioned  piracy,  no  one  was 
more  in  favor  of  punishing  it  than  he ;  but  he  had  no  idea  of  imputing 
piracy  to  men  fighting  under  the  flag  of  a  people  at  war  for  independence 
— while  he  pursued  this  course,  even  in  advance  of  the  legitimates  of 
Europe,  what,  he  asked,  had  been  the  course  of  England  herself  on  this 
head  ?  Here  he  quoted  a  few  passages  from  the  work  of  Abbe  de  Pradt, 
recently  translated  b)T  one  of  our  citizens,  which  he  said,  though  the  author 
was  not  very  popular  among  crowned  heads,  no  man  could  read  without  be- 
ing enlightened  and  instructed.  These  passages  dwell  on  the  importance 
of  the  commerce  of  South  America,  when  freed  from  its  present  restraints, 
and  so  forth.  What  would  I  give,  exclaimed  he,  could  we  appreciate  the 
advantages,  which  may  be  realized  by  pursuing  the  course  which  I  propose  ! 
It  is  in  our  power  to  create  a  system  of  which  we  shall  be  the  center  and  in 
which  all  South  America  will  act  with  us.  In  respect  to  commerce,  we 
shall  be  most  benefited  ;  this  country  would  become  the  place  of  deposit  of 
the  commerce  of  the  world.  Our  citizens  engaged  in  foreign  trade  at  pres- 
ent were  disheartened  by  the  condition  of  that  trade  ;  they  must  take  new 
channels  for  it,  and  none  so  advantageous  could  be  found,  as  those  which 
the  trade  with  South  America  would  afford.  Mr.  Clay  took  a  prospective 
view  of  the  growth  of  wealth,  and  increase  of  population  of  this  country 
and  South  America.  That  country  had  now  a  population  of  upwaad  of 
eighteen  millions.  The  same  activity  in  the  principle  of  population  would 
exist  in  that  country  as  here.  Twenty-five  years  hence  it  might  be  esti- 
mated at  thirty-six  millions ;  fifty  years  hence,  at  seventy-two  millions. 
We  now  have  a  population  of  ten  millions.  From  the  character  of  our 
population,  we  must  always  take  the  lead  in  the  prosecution  of  commerce 
and  manufactures.  Imagine  the  vast  power  of  the  two  countries,  and  the 
value  of  the  intercourse  between  them,  when  we  shall  have  a  population  of 
forty  millions,  and  they  of  seventy  millions  !  In  relation  to  South  America, 
the  people  of  the  United  States  will  occupy  the  same  position  as  the  people 
of  New  England  do  to  the  rest  of  the  United  States.     Our  enterprise,  in- 


ON   SENDING   A   MINISTER   TO   SOUTH   AMERICA.  243 

dustry,  and  habits  of  economy,  will  give  us  the  advantage  in  any  competi- 
tion which  South  America  may  sustain  with  us,  and  so  forth. 

But,  however  important  our  early  recognition  of  the  independence  of 
the  South  might  be  to  us,  as  respects  our  commercial  and  manufacturing 
interests,  was  there  not  another  view  of  the  subject,  infinitely  more  grati- 
fying ?  We  should  become  the  center  of  a  system  wbich  would  constitute 
the  rallying-point  of  human  freedom  against  all  the  despotism  of  the  old 
world.  Did  any  man  doubt  the  feelings  of  the  South  toward  us?  In 
spite  of  our  coldness  toward  them,  of  the  rigor  of  our  laws,  and  the  con- 
duct of  our  officers,  tbeir  hearts  still  turned  toward  us,  as  to  their  brethren ; 
and  he  had  no  earthly  doubt,  if  our  government  would  take  the  lead  and 
recognize  them,  they  would  become  yet  more  anxious  to  imitate  our  insti- 
tutions, and  to  secure  to  themselves  and  to  their  posterity  the  same  freedom 
which  we  enjoy. 

On  a  subject  of  this  sort,  he  asked,  was  it  possible  we  could  be  content  to 
remain,  as  we  now  were,  looking  anxiously  to  Europe,  watching  the  eyes 
of  Lord  Castlereagh,  and  getting  scraps  of  letters  doubtfully  indicative  of 
his  wishes  ;  and  sending  to  the  Czar  of  Russia  and  getting  another  scrap 
from  Count  Nesselrode  ?  Why  not  proceed  to  act  on  our  own  responsibil- 
ity, and  recognize  these  governments  as  independent,  instead  of  taking  the 
lead  of  the  holy  alliance  in  a  course  which  jeopardizes  the  happiness  of  un- 
born millions.  He  deprecated  this  deference  for  foreign  powers.  If  Lord 
Castlereagh  says  we  may  recognize,  we  do  ;  if  not,  we  do  not.  A  single  ex" 
pression  of  the  British  minister  to  the  present  Secretary  of  State,  then  our 
minister  abroad,  he  was  ashamed  to  say,  had  molded  the  policy  of  our 
government  toward  South  America.  Our  institutions  now  make  us  free ; 
but  how  long  shall  we  continue  so,  if  we  mold  our  opinions  on  those  of 
Europe  ?  Let  us  break  these  commercial  and  political  fetters ;  let  us  no 
longer  watch  the  nod  of  any  European  politician  ;  let  us  become  real  and 
true  Americans,  and  place  ourselves  at  the  head  of  the  American  system. 

Gentleman  all  said,  they  were  all  anxious  to  see  the  independence  of  the 
South  established.  If  sympathy  for  them  was  enough,  the  patriots  would 
have  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the  abundant  expressions  of  it.  But  some- 
thing more  was  wanting.  Some  gentlemen  had  intimated,  that  the  people 
of  the  South  were  unfit  for  freedom.  Will  gentlemen  contend,  said  Mr. 
Clay,  because  those  people  are  not  like  us  in  all  particulars,  they  are  there- 
fore unfit  for  freedom  ?  In  some  particulars,  he  ventured  to  say,  that  the 
people  of  South  America  were  in  advance  of  us.  On  the  point  which  had 
been  so  much  discussed  on  this  floor,  during  the  present  session,  they  were 
greatly  in  advance  of  us.  Granada,  Venezeula,  and  Buenos  Ayres,  had  all 
emancipated  their  slaves.  He  did  not  say  that  we  ought  to  do  so,  or  that 
they  ought  to  have  done  so,  under  different  circumstances ;  but  he  rejoiced 
that  the  circumstances  were  such  as  to  permit  them  to  do  it. 

Two  questions  only,  he  argued,  were  necessarily  preliminary  to  the  rec- 
ognition of  the  independence  of  the  people  of  the  South ;  first,  as  to  the 


244  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY   CLAY. 

fact  of  their  independence ;  and,  secondly,  as  to  the  capacity  for  self-gov- 
ernment. On  the  first  point,  not  a  doubt  existed.  On  the  second,  there 
was  every  evidence  in  their  favor.  They  had  fostered  schools  with  great 
care,  there  were  more  newspapers  in  the  single  town  of  Buenos  Ayres  (at 
the  time  he  was  speaking)  than  in  the  whole  kingdom  of  Spain.  He  never 
saw  a  question  discussed  with  more  ability  than  that  in  a  newspaper  of  Buenos 
Ayres,  whether  a  federative  or  consolidated  form  of  government  was  best. 

But,  though  every  argument  in  favor  of  the  recognition  should  be  ad- 
mitted to  be  just,  it  would  be  said,  that  another  revolution  had  occurred  in 
Spair  and  we  ought,  therefore,  to  delay.  On  the  contrary,  said  he,  every 
consideration  recommended  us  to  act  now.  If  Spain  succeeded  in  establish- 
ing her  freedom,  the  colonies  must  also  be  free.  The  first  desire  of  a  gov- 
ernment itself  free,  must  be  to  give  liberty  to  its  dependences.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  Spain  should  not  succeed  in  gaining  her  freedom,  no  man 
can  doubt  that  Spain,  in  her  reduced  state,  would  no  longer  have  power  to 
carry  on  the  contest.  So  many  millions  of  men  could  not  be  subjugated 
by  the  enervated  arm  and  exhausted  means  of  aged  Spain.  In  ten  years 
of  war,  the  most  unimportant  province  of  South  America  had  not  been 
subdued  by  all  the  wealth  and  the  resources  of  Spain.  The  certainty  of 
the  successful  resistance  of  the  attempts  of  Spain  to  reduce  them,  would  be 
found  in  the  great  extent  of  the  provinces  of  South  America — of  larger 
extent  than  all  the  empire  of  Russia.  The  relation  of  the  colonies  and 
mother  country,  could  not  exist,  from  the  nature  of  things,  under  what- 
ever aspect  the  government  of  Spain  might  assume.  The  condition  of 
Spain  was  no  reason  for  neglecting  now  to  do  what  we  ought  to  have  done 
long  ago.  Every  thing,  on  the  contrary,  tended  to  prove  that  this,  this  was 
the  accepted  time. 

With  regard  to  the  form  of  his  proposition,  all  he  wanted  was,  to  obtain 
an  expression  of  the  opinion  of  the  House  on  this  subject ;  and  whether  a 
minister  should  be  authorized  to  one  or  the  other  of  these  governments,  or 
whether  he  should  be  of  one  grade  or  of  another,  he  cared  not.  This  re- 
public, with  the  exception  of  the  people  of  South  America,  constituted  the 
sole  depository  of  political  and  religious  freedom ;  and  can  it  be  possible, 
said  he,  that  we  can  remain  passive  spectators  of  the  struggle  of  those 
people  to  break  the  same  chains  which  once  bound  us  ?  The  opinion  of 
the  friends  of  freedom  in  Europe  is,  that  our  policy  has  been  cold,  heartless, 
and  indifferent,  toward  the  greatest  cause  which  could  possibly  engage  our 
affections  and  enlist  our  feelings  in  its  behalf. 

Mr.  Clay  concluded  by  saying  that,  whatever  might  be  the  decision  of 
this  House  on  this  question,  proposing  shortly  to  go  into  retirement  from 
public  life,  he  should  there  have  the  consolation  of  knowing  that  he  had 
used  his  best  exertions  in  favor  of  a  people  inhabiting  a  territory  calculated 
to  contain  as  many  souls  as  the  whole  of  Christendom  besides,  whose  hap- 
piness was  at  stake,  and  which  it  was  in  the  power  of  this  government  to 
do  so  much  toward  securing. 


ON    THE    GREEK    REVOLUTION. 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES,  JANUARY  20,  1824. 

[American  citizens,  who  have  lived  a  quarter  of  a  century 
since  they  were  old  enough  to  observe  the  public  affairs  of  the 
world,  will  even  now  (1856)  vividly  remember  the  exciting  in- 
terest of  the  Greek  Ee volution,  the  barbarous  atrocities  of  the 
Turks  in  attempting  to  suppress  it,  and  the  sympathy  of  all 
Christendom  for  the  Greeks,  while  fighting  for  independence. 
It  was  the  Cross  against  the  Crescent,  Christianity  against 
Mohammedism.  The  Greeks  being  nominally  Christians,  all 
Christian  nations  naturally  sympathized  with  them,  more  espe- 
cially on  account  of  the  inhumanities  practiced  by  the  Turks  on 
the  Greeks,  when  the  latter  fell  into  the  power  of  the  former. 
The  rules  of  civilized  warfare  were  utterly  disregarded  by  the 
Turks,  and  savage  butchery  followed  in  the  train  of  their  vic- 
tories. 

The  President  of  the  United  States,  Mr.  Monroe,  had  noticed 
this  struggle  in  his  annual  message,  and  expressed  a  sympathy 
for  the  Greeks,  which  met  with  a  universal  and  approving  re- 
sponse from  the  American  people.  Mr.  Webster,  then  a  member 
of  the  House  of  Representatives,  introduced  the  following  reso- 
lution : 

"  That  provision  ought  to  be  made  by  law  for  defraying  the 
expense  incident  to  the  appointment  of  an  agent  or  commis- 
sioner to  Greece,  whenever  the  president  shall  deem  it  expedient 
to  make  such  an  appointment." 

Upon  which  he  (Mr.  Webster)  made  an  able  and  eloquent 
speech,  which  was  followed  by  a  speech  from  Mr.  Clay,  of  which 
the  following  is  a  copy.  It  hardly  need  be  said  that  Mr.  Clay's 
sympathies  for  the  South  American  States,  in  their  struggle  for 
independence,  would  naturally  respond  to  the  Greek  Revolution. 
He  seconded  most  earnestly  and  vigorously  the  motion  of  Mr. 
Webster,  and  declared,  that  if  this  were  Federalism — as  had 
been  charged,  because  it  came  from  Mr.  Webster — then  he  (Mr. 


246  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

Clay)  was  a  Federalist,  and  that  lie  would  quit  the  Republican 
ranks  if  he  could  find  no  sympathy  there  for  such  a  cause  as 
suffering  Greece  presented.  The  Holy  Alliance  had  set  itself 
up  as  the  guardian  of  European  affairs,  and  of  Greece  in  her 
present  struggle  ;  and  it  had  been  suggested  in  this  debate,  on 
the  floor  of  the  House,  that  for  Republican  America  to  express 
her  feelings  in  view  of  this  spectacle,  would  be  displeasing  to 
that  tribunal.  That  was  another  reason  why  Mr.  Clay  would 
urge  the  independent  and  sympathetic  action  of  the  government 
of  the  United  States.  He  would  never  be  deterred  by  such  a 
plea  in  terror  em  over  the  feelings  of  the  American  heart.  We 
had  first  and  alone  recognized  the  independence  of  the  South 
American  States  ;  and  if  there  were  any  good  reasons  for  that, 
the  reasons  were  much  stronger  to  express  our  sympathy  with 
the  Greeks.  Although  this  motion  of  Mr.  Webster,  so  ably 
supported  by  himself  and  Mr.  Clay,  failed  to  obtain  a  vote  of 
the  House  of  Representatives,  the  instructions  of  our  govern- 
ment to  Commodore  Rogers,  in  the  Mediterranean,  were  doubt- 
less influenced  by  this  debate,  as  appears  by  the  following  ex- 
tract from  a  letter  of  General  Lafayette  to  Mr.  Clay,  dated 
La  Grange,  Nov.  25,  1825  :  "  The  rumor  of  very  peculiar  acts 
of  benevolence  from  the  American  squadron  and  Commodore 
Rogers  in  behalf  of  the  Greeks,  which  has  produced  no  party 
complaint  that  I  know  of,  has,  in  the  enlightened  and  liberal 
part  of  the  world,  added  to  the  popularity  and  dignity  of  the 
American  name."  This  incidental  and  indirect  evidence  verifies 
the  argument  of  Mr.  Clay,  that  nothing  could  be  lost,  and  much 
might  be  gained,  by  our  showing  favor  to  the  cause  of  the  Greek 
Revolution.] 

In  rising,  let  me  state  distinctly  the  substance  of  the  original  proposi- 
tion of  the  gentleman  from  Massachusetts  (Mr.  Webster),  with  that  of  the 
amendment  of  the  gentleman  from  South  Carolina  (Mr.  Poinsett).  The 
resolution  proposes  a  provision  of  the  means  to  defray  the  expense  of  de- 
puting a  commissioner  or  agent  to  Greece,  whenever  the  president,  who 
knows,  or  ought  to  know,  the  disposition  of  all  the  European  powers, 
Turkish  or  Christian,  shall  deem  it  proper.  The  amendment  goes  to  with- 
hold any  appropriation  to  that  object,  but  to  mate  a  public  declaration  of 
our  sympathy  with  the  Greeks,  and  of  our  good  wishes  for  the  success  of 
their  cause.  And  how  has  this  simple,  unpretending,  unambitious,  this 
harmless  proposition,  been  treated  in  debate  ?  It  has  been  argued  as  if  it 
offered  aid  to  the  Greeks ;  as  if  it  proposed  the  recognition  of  the  inde- 
pendence of  their  government;  as  a  measure  of  unjustifiable  interference 


ON   THE    GREEK    REVOLUTION.  247 

in  the  internal  affairs  of  a  foreign  State,  and,  finally,  as  war.  And  they 
who  thus  argue  the  question,  while  they  absolutely  surrender  themselves 
to  the  illusions  of  their  own  fervid  imaginations,  and  depict,  in  glowing 
terms,  the  monstrous  and  alarming  consequences  which  are  to  spring  out 
of  a  proposition  so  simple,  impute  to  us,  who  are  its  humble  advocates, 
quixotism,  quixotism  !  While  they  are  taking  the  most  extravagant  and 
boundless  range,  and  arguing  any  thing  and  every  thing  btit  the  question 
before  the  committee,  they  accuse,  us  of  enthusiasm,  of  giving  the  reins  to 
excited  feeling,  of  being  transported  by  our  imaginations.  No,  sir,  the 
resolution  is  no  proposition  for  aid,  nor  for  recognition,  nor  for  interference, 
nor  for  war. 

I  know  that  there  are  some  who  object  to  the  resolution  on  account  of 
the  source  from  which  it  has  sprung — who  except  to  its  mover,  as  if  its 
value  or  importance  were  to  be  estimated  by  personal  considerations.  I 
have  long  had  the  pleasure  of  knowing  the  honorable  gentleman  from 
Massachusetts,  and  sometimes  that  of  acting  with  him ;  and  I  have  much 
satisfaction  in  expressing  my  high  admiration  of  his  great  talents.  But  I 
would  appeal  to  my  republican  friends,  those  faithful  sentinels  of  civil  lib- 
erty with  whom  I  have  ever  acted,  shall  we  reject  a  proposition,  consonant 
to  our  principles,  favoring  the  good  and  great  cause,  on  account  of  the  polit- 
ical character  of  its  mover  ?  Shall  we  not  rather  look  to  the  intrinsic 
merits  of  the  measure,  and  seek  every  fit  occasion  to  strengthen  and  per- 
petuate liberal  principles  and  noble  sentiments  ?  If  it  were  possible  for  re- 
publicans to  cease  to  be  champions  of  human  freedom,  and  if  federalists 
become  its  only  supporters,  I  would  cease  to  be  a  republican ;  I  would  be- 
come a  federalist.  The  preservation  of  the  public  confidence  can  only  be 
secured,  or  merited,  by  a  faithful  adherence  to  the  principles  by  which  it 
has  been  acquired. 

Mr.  Chairman,  is  it  not  extraordinary  that  for  these  two  successive  years 
the  president  of  the  United  States  should  have  been  freely  indulged,  not 
only  without  censure,  but  with  universal  applause,  to  express  the  feelings 
which  both  the  resolution  and  the  amendment  proclaim,  and  yet,  if  this 
House  venture  to  unite  with  him,  the  most  awful  consequences  are  to  en- 
sue ?  From  Maine  to  Georgia,  from  the  Atlantic  ocean  to  the  Gulf  of 
Mexico,  the  sentiment  of  approbation  has  blazed  with  the  rapidity  of  elec- 
tricity. Everywhere  the  interest  in  the  Grecian  cause  is  felt  with  the 
deepest  intensity,  expressed  in  every  form,  and  increases  with  every  new 
day  and  passing  hour.  And  are  the  representatives  of  the  people  alone  to 
be  insulated  from  the  common  moral  atmosphere  of  the  whole  land? 
Shall  we  shut  ourselves  up  in  apathy,  and  separate  ourselves  from  our 
country,  from  our  constituents,  from  our  chief  magistrate,  from  our  prin- 
ciples ? 

The  measure  has  been  most  unreasonably  magnified.  Gentlemen  speak 
of  the  watchful  jealousy  of  the  Turk,  and  seem  to  think  the  slightest 
movement  of  this  body  will  be  matter  of  serious  speculation  at  Constanti- 


248  SPEECHES    OF    HENEY    CLAY 

nople.  I  believe  that  neither  the  sublime  porte,  nor  the  European  allies, 
attach  any  such  exaggerated  importance  to  the  acts  and  deliberations  of  this 
body.  The  Turk  will,  in  all  probability,  never  hear  of  the  names  of  the 
gentlemen  who  either  espouse  or  oppose  the  resolution.  It  certainly  is 
not  Avithout  a  value ;  but  that  value  is  altogether  moral ;  it  throws  our 
little  tribute  into  the  vast  stream  of  public  opinion,  which  sooner  or  later 
must  regulate  the  physical  action  upon  the  great  interests  of  the  civil- 
ized world.  But,  rely  upon  it,  the  Ottoman  is  not  about  to  declare  war 
against  us  because  this  unoffending  proposition  has  been  offered  by  my 
honorable  friend  from  Massachusetts,  whose  name,  however  distinguished 
and  eminent  he  may  be  in  our  own  country,  has  probably  never  reached 
the  ears  of  the  sublime  porte.  The  allied  powers  are  not  going  to  be 
thrown  into  a  state  of  consternation,  because  we  appropriate  some  two  or 
three  thousand  dollars  to  send  an  agent  to  Greece. 

The  question  has  been  argued  as  if  the  Greeks  would  be  exposed  to 
still  more  shocking  enormities  by  its  passage  ;  as  if  the  Turkish  cimeter 
would  be  rendered  still  keener,  and  dyed  deeper  and  yet  deeper  in  Chris- 
tian blood.  Sir,  if  such  is  to  be  the  effect  of  the  declaration  of  our  sym- 
pathy, the  evil  has  been  already  produced.  That  declaration  has  been 
already  publicly  and  solemnly  made  by  the  chief  magistrate  of  the  United 
States,  in  two  distinct  messages.  It  is  this  document  which  commands,  at 
home  and  abroad,  the  most  fixed  and  universal  attention ;  which  is  trans- 
lated into  all  the  foreign  journals  ;  read  by  sovereigns  and  their  ministers  ; 
and,  possibly,  in  the  Divan  itself.  But  our  resolutions  are  domestic,  for 
home  consumption,  and  rarely,  if  ever,  meet  imperial  or  royal  eyes.  The 
president,  in  his  messages,  after  a  most  touching  representation  of  the  feel- 
ings excited  by  the  Greek  insurrection,  tells  you  that  the  dominion  of  the 
Turk  is  gone  forever  ;  and  that  the  most  sanguine  hope  is  entertained  that 
Greece  will  achieve  her  independence.  Well,  sir,  if  this  be  the  fact,  if  the  al- 
lied powers  themselves  may,  possibly,  before  we  again  assemble  in  this  hall, 
acknowledge  that  independence,  is  it  not  fit  and  becoming  in  this  House  to 
make  provision  that  our  president  shall  be  among  the  foremost,  or  at  least 
not  amono-  the  last,  in  that  acknowledgment  1  So  far  from  this  resolu- 
tion  being  likely  to  whet  the  vengeance  of  the  Turk  against  his  Grecian 
victims,  I  believe  its  tendency  will  be  directly  the  reverse.  Sir,  with  all  his 
unlimited  power,  and  in  all  the  elevation  of  his  despotic  throne,  he  is  at 
last  but  a  mau,  made  as  we  are,  of  flesh,  of  muscle,  of  bone  and  sinew.  He 
is  susceptible  of  pain,  and  can  feel,  and  has  felt  the  uncalculating  valor  of 
American  freemen  in  some  of  his  dominions.  And  when  he  is  made  to 
understand  that  the  executive  of  this  government  is  sustained  by  the  rep- 
resentatives of  the  people  ;  that  our  entire  political  fabric,  base,  column, 
and  entablature,  rulers  and  people,  with  heart,  soul,  mind  and  strength,  are 
all  on  the  side  of  the  gallant  people  whom  he  would  crush,  he  will  be 
more  likely  to  restrain  than  to  increase  his  atrocities  upon  suffering  and 
bleeding  Greece. 


ON    THE    GREEK    REVOLUTION.  249 

The  gentleman  from  New  Hampshire  (Mr.  Bartlett)  has  made,  on  this 
occasion,  a  very  ingenious,  sensible,  and  ironical  speech — an  admirable  de- 
but for  a  new  member,  and  such  as  I  hope  we  shall  often  have  repeated  on 
this  floor.  But  permit  me  to  advise  my  young  friend  to  remember  the 
maxim,  "  that  sufficient  unto  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof ;"  and  when  the 
resolution,*  on  another  subject,  which  I  had  the  honor  to  submit,  shall 
come  up  to  be  discussed,  I  hope  he  will  not  content  himself  with  saying,  as 
he  has  now  done,  that  it  is  a  very  extraordinary  one ;  but  that  he  will  then 
favor  the  House  with  an  argumentative  speech,  proving  that  it  is  our  duty 
quietly  to  see  laid  prostrate  every  fortress  of  human  hope,  and  to  behold, 
with  indifference,  the  last  outwork  of  liberty  taken  and  destroyed. 

It  has  been  said  that  the  proposed  measure  will  be  a  departure  from  our 
uniform  policy  with  respect  to  foreign  nations ;  that  it  will  provoke  the 
wrath  of  the  holy  alliance  ;  and  that  it  will,  in  effect,  be  a  repetition  of  their 
own  offense,  by  an  unjustifiable  interposition  in  the  domestic  concerns  of 
other  powers.  No,  sir,  not  even  if  it  authorized,  which  it  does  not,  an 
immediate  recognition  of  Grecian  independence.  What  has  been  the  set- 
tled and  steady  policy  and  practice  of  this  government,  from  the  days  of 
Washington  to  the  present  moment  ?  In  the  case  of  France,  the  father  of 
his  country  and  his  successors  received  Genet,  Fouchet,  and  all  the  French 
ministers  who  followed  them,  whether  sent  from  king,  convention,  anarchy, 
emperor,  or  king  again.  The  rule  we  have  ever  followed  has  been  this : 
to  look  at  the  state  of  the  fact,  and  to  recognize  that  government,  be  it 
what  it  might,  which  was  in  actual  possession  of  sovereign  power.  When 
one  government  is  overthrown,  and  another  is  established  on  its  ruins,  with- 
out embarrasssing  ourselves  with  any  of  the  principles  involved  in  the  con- 
test, we  have  ever  acknowledged  the  new  and  actual  government  as  soon  as 
it  had  undisputed  existence.  Our  simple  inquiry  has  been,  is  there  a  gov- 
ernment de  facto  ?  We  have  had  a  recent  and  memorable  example. 
When  the  allied  ministers  retired  from  Madrid,  and  refused  to  accompany 
Ferdinand  to  Cadiz,  ours  remained,  and  we  sent  out  a  new  minister,  who 
sought  at  that  port  to  present  himself  to  the  constitutional  king.  Why  \ 
Because  it  was  the  government  of  Spain,  in  fact.  Did  the  allies  declare  war 
against  us  for  the  exercise  of  this  incontestable  attribute  of  sovereignty  \ 
Did  they  even  transmit  any  diplomatic  note  complaining  of  our  conduct  ? 
The  line  of  our  European  policy  has  been  so  plainly  described  that  it  is 
impossible  to  mistake  it.  We  are  to  abstain  from  all  interference  in  their 
disputes,  to  take  no  part  in  their  contests,  to  make  no  entangling  alliances 
with  any  of  them  ;  but  to  assert  and  exercise  our  indisputable  right  of 
opening  and  maintaining  diplomatic  intercourse  with  any  actual  sov- 
ereignty. 

There  is  reason   to  apprehend   that  a  tremendous  storm  is   ready   to 

*  Mr.  Clay's  resolution,  that  the  people  of  the  United  States  would  not  regard 
with  indifference  any  interference  of  the  holy  alliance  against  the  independence  of 
South  America. 


250  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

burst  upon  our  nappy  country — one  which  may  call  into  action  all  our 
vigor,  courage,  and  resources.    Is  it  wise  or  prudent,  in  preparing  to  breast 
the  storm,  if  it  must  come,  to  talk  to  this  nation  of  its  incompetency  to 
repel  European  aggression — to  lower  its  spirit,  to  weaken  its  moral  energy, 
and  to  quality  it  for  easy  conquest  and  base  submission  ?     If  there  be  any 
reality  in  the  dangers  which  are  supposed  to  encompass  us,  should  we  not 
animate  the  people,  and  adjure  them  to  believe,  as  I  do,  that  our  resources 
are  ample  ;  and  that  we  can  bring  into  the  field  a  million  of  freemen,  ready 
to  exhaust  their  last  drop  of  blood,  and  to  spend  the  last  cent  in  the  de- 
fense of  the  country,  its  liberty,  and  its  institutions  ?     Sir,  are  these,  if 
united,  to  be  conquered  by  all  Europe  combined  ?     All  the  perils  to  which 
we  can  possibly  be  exposed  are  much  less  in  reality  than  the  imagination 
is  disposed  to  paint  them.     And  they  are  best  averted  by  a  habitual  con- 
templation of  them,  by  reducing  them  to  their  true  dimensions.     If  com- 
bined Europe  is  to  precipitate  itself  upon  us,  we  can  not  too  soon  begin  to 
invigorate  our  strength,  to  teach  our  heads  to  think,  our  hearts  to  conceive, 
and  our  arms  to  execute  the  high   and  noble  deeds  which  belong  to  the 
character  and  glory  of  our  country.     The  experience  of  the  world  instructs 
us,  that  conquests  are  already  achieved  which   are   boldly  and  firmly  re- 
solved on ;  and  that  men  only  become  slaves  who  have  ceased  to  resolve  to 
be  free.     If  we  wish  to  cover  ourselves  with  the  best  of  all  armor,  let  us 
not  discourage  our  people,  let  us  stimulate  their  ardor,  let  us  sustain  their 
resolution,  let  us  proclaim  to  them  that  wTe  feel  as  they  feel,  and  that,  with 
them,  we  are  determined  to  live  or  die  like  freemen. 

Surely,  sir,  we  need  no  long  or  learned  lectures  about  the  nature  of  gov- 
ernment, and  the  influence  of  property  or  ranks  on  society.  We  may  con- 
tent ourselves  with  studying  the  true  character  of  our  own  people,  and 
with  knowing  that  the  interests  are  confided  to  us  of  a  nation  capable  of 
doing  and  suffering  all  things  for  its  liberty.  Such  a  nation,  if  its  rulers 
be  faithful,  must  be  invincible.  I  well  remember  an  observation  made  to 
me  by  the  most  illustrious  female  of  the  age,  if  not  of  her  sex,  Madame 
de  Stael.  All  history  showed,  she  said,  that  a  nation  was  never  conquered. 
No,  sir,  no  united  nation,  that  resolves  to  be  free,  can  be  conquered.  Aud 
has  it  come  to  this  ?  Are  we  so  humbled,  so  low,  so  debased,  that  we  dare 
not  express  our  sympathy  for  suffering  Greece ;  that  we  dare  not  articu- 
late our  detestation  of  the  brutal  excesses  of  which  she  has  been  the 
bleeding  victim,  lest  we  might  offend  some  one  or  more  of  their  imperial 
and  royal  majesties?  If  gentlemen  are  afraid  to  act  rashly  on  such  a  sub- 
ject, suppose,  Mr.  Chairman,  that  we  unite  in  an  humble  petition,  ad- 
dressed to  their  majesties,  beseeching  them,  that  of  their  gracious  con- 
descension, they  would  allow  us  to  express  our  feelings  and  our  sympathies. 
How  shall  it  run  ?  "  We,  the  representatives  of  the  free  people  of  the 
United  States  of  America,  humbly  approach  the  thrones  of  your  im- 
perial and  royal  majesties,  and  supplicate  that,  of  your  imperial  and  roy- 
al clemency — "     I  can  not  go  through  the  disgusting   recital ;  my  lips 


ON    THE    GREEK    REVOLUTION.  251 

have  not  yet  learned  to  pronounce  the  sycophantic  language  of  a  degraded 
slave !  Are  we  so  mean,  so  base,  so  despicable,  that  we  may  not  attempt 
to  express  our  horror,  utter  our  indignation,  at  the  most  brutal  and  atro- 
cious war  that  ever  stained  earth  or  shocked  high  heaven  ?  at  the  ferocious 
deeds  of  a  savage  and  infuriated  soldiery,  stimulated  and  urged  on  by  the 
clergy  of  a  fanatical  and  inimical  religion,  and  rioting  in  all  the  excesses  of 
blood  and  butchery,  at  the  mere  details  of  which  the  heart  sickens  and  re- 
coils ? 

If  the  great  body  of  Christendom  can  look  on  calmly  and  coolly,  while 
all  this  is  perpetrated  on  a  Christian  people,  in  its  own  immediate  vicinity? 
in  its  very  presence,  let  us  at  least  evince,  that  one  of  its  remote  extrem- 
ities is  susceptible  of  sensibility  to  Christian  wrongs,  and  capable  of  sym- 
pathy for  Christian  sufferings ;  that  in  this  remote  quarter  of  the  world 
there  are  hearts  not  yet  closed  against  compassion  for  human  woes,  that 
can  pour  out  their  indignant  feelings  at  the  oppression  of  a  people  endeared 
to  us  by  every  ancient  recollection,  and  every  modern  tie.  Sir,  attempts 
have  been  made  to  alarm  the  committee  by  the  dangers  to  our  commerce 
in  the  Mediterranean  ;  and  a  wretched  invoice  of  figs  and  opium  has  been 
spread  before  us  to  repress  our  sensibilities  and  to  eradicate  our  humanity. 
Ah  !  sir,  "  what  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose 
his  own  soul  ?"  or  what  shall  it  avail  a  nation  to  save  the  whole  of  a  miser- 
able trade,  and  lose  its  liberties  ? 

On  the  subject  of  the  other  independent  American  States,  hitherto  it  has 
not  been  necessary  to  depart  from  the  rule   of  our  foreign  relations,  ob- 
served in  regard  to  Europe.     Whether  it  will  become  us  to  do  so  or  not, 
will  be  considered  when  we  take  up  another  resolution,  lying  on  the  table. 
But  we  may  not  only  adopt  this  measure  :  we  may  go  further ;  we  may 
recognize   the  government  in  the  Morea,  if  actually  independent,  and  it 
will  be  neither  war,  nor  cause  of  war,  nor  any  violation  of  our  neutrality. 
Beside,  sir,  what  is  Greece  to  the  allies  ?     A  part  of  the  dominions  of  any 
of  them  ?     By  no  means.     Suppose   the  people  in  one  of  the  Philippine 
Isles,  or  any  other  spot  still  more  insulated  and  remote,  in  Asia  or  Africa, 
were  to  resist  their  former  rulers,  and  set  up  and    establish  a  new  gov- 
ernment, are  we  not  to  recognize  them,  in  dread  of  the  holy  allies  ?     If 
they  are  going  to  interfere,  from  the  danger  of  the  contagion  of  the  ex- 
ample, here  is  the  spot,  our  own   favored  land,  where  they  must  strike. 
This  government,  you,  Mr.  Chairman,  and  the  body  over  which  you  pre- 
side, are  the  living  and  cutting  reproach  to  allied  despotism.     If  we  are 
to  offend  them,   it  is  not  by  passing  this  resolution.     We  are  daily  and 
hourly  giving  them  cause  of  war.     It  is  here,  and  in  our  free  institutions, 
that  they  will  assail  us.     They  will  attack  us  because  you  sit  beneath  that 
canopy,  and  we  are  freely  debating  and  deliberating  upon  the  great  in- 
terests  of  freemen,    and    dispensing    the    blessings    of  free  government. 
They  will  strike,  because  we  pass  one  of  those  bills  on  your  table.     The 
passage  of  the  least  of  them,  by  our  free  authority,  is  more  galling  to 


252  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

despotic  powers,  than  would  be  the  adoption  of  this  so  much  dreaded 
resolution.  Pass  it,  and  what  do  you  do  ?  You  exercise  an  indisputable 
attribute  of  sovereignty,  for  which  you  are  responsible  to  none  of  them. 
You  do  the  same  when  you  perform  any  other  legislative  function ;  no 
less.  If  the  allies  object  to  this  measure,  let  them  forbid  us  to  take  a 
vote  in  this  House;  let  them  strip  us  of  every  attribute  of  independent 
government ;  let  them  disperse  us. 

Will  gentlemen  attempt  to  maintain  that,  on  the  principles  of  the  law 
of  nations,  those  allies  would  have  cause  of  war  ?  If  there  be  any  prin- 
ciple which  has  been  settled  for  ages,  any  which  is  founded  in  the  very 
nature  of  things,  it  is  that  every  independent  state  has  the  clear  right  to 
judge  of  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  other  sovereign  powers.  I  admit 
that  there  may  be  a  state  of  inchoate  initiative  sovereignity,  in  which  a 
new  government,  just  struggling  into  being,  can  not  be  said  yet  perfectly 
to  exist.  But  the  premature  recognition  of  such  new  government  can 
give  offense  justly  to  no  other  than  its  ancient  sovereign.  The  right  of 
recognition  comprehends  the  right  to  be  informed  ;  and  the  means  of  in- 
formation must,  of  necessity,  depend  upon  the  sound  discretion  of  the 
party  seeking  it.  You  may  send  out  a  commission  of  inquiry,  and  charge 
it  with  a  provident  attention  to  your  own  people  and  your  own  interests. 
Such  will  be  the  character  of  the  proposed  agency.  It  will  not  necessarily 
follow,  that  any  public  functionary  will  be  appointed  by  the  president. 
You  merely  grant  the  means  by  which  the  executive  may  act  when  he 
thinks  proper.  What  does  he  tell  you  in  his  message  ?  That  Greece  is 
contending  for  her  independence  ;  that  all  sympathize  with  her  ;  and  that 
no  power  has  declared  against  her.  Pass  this  resolution,  and  what  is  the 
reply  which  it  conveys  to  him  ?  "  You  have  sent  us  grateful  intelligence  ; 
we  feel  warmly  for  Greece,  and  we  grant  you  money,  that,  when  you  shall 
think  it  proper,  when  the  interests  of  this  nation  shall  not  be  jeoparded, 
you  may  depute  a  commissioner  or  public  agent  to  Greece."  The  whole 
responsibility  is  then  left  where  the  Constitution  puts  it.  A  member  in 
his  place  may  make  a  speech  or  proposition,  the  House  may  even  pass 
a  vote,  in  respect  to  our  foreign  affairs,  which  the  president,  with  the 
whole  field  lying  full  before  him,  would  not  deem  it  expedient  to  effec- 
tuate. 

But,  sir,  it  is  not  for  Greece  alone  that  I  desire  to  see  this  measure 
adopted.  It  will  give  to  her  but  little  support,  and  that  purely  of  a  moral 
kind.  It  is  principally  for  America,  for  the  credit  and  character  of  our 
common  country,  for  our  own  unsullied  name,  that  I  hope  to  see  it  pass. 
Mr.  Chairman,  what  appearance  on  the  page  of  history  would  a  record 
like  this  exhibit  ?  "  In  the  month  of  January,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour,  1824,  while  all  European  Christendom  beheld,  with  cold  and  un- 
feeling indifference,  the  unexampled  wrongs  and  inexpressible  misery  of 
Christian  Greece,  a  proposition  was  made  in  the  Congress  of  the  United 
States,  almost  the  sole,  the  last,  the  greatest  depository  of  human  hope  and 


ON    THE    GREEK    REVOLUTION.  253 

human  freedom,  the  representatives  of  a  gallant  nation,  containing-  a  mil- 
lion of  freemen  ready  to  fly  to  arms,  while  the  people  of  that  nation  were 
spontaneously  expressing  its  deep-toned  feeling,  and  the  whole  continent, 
by  one  simultaneous  emotion,  was  rising,  and  solemnly  and  anxiously  sup- 
plicating and  invoking  high  heaven  to  spare  and  succor  Greece,  and  to  in- 
vigorate her  arms  in  her  glorious  cause,  while  temples  and  senate  houses 
were  alike  resounding  with  one  burst  of  generous  and  holy  sympathy  ;  in 
the  year  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  that  Saviour  of  Greece  and  of  us ;  a 
proposition  was  offered  in  the  American  Congress  to  send  a  messenger  to 
Greece,  to  inquire  into  her  state  and  condition,  with  a  kind  expression  of 
our  good  wishes  and  our  sympathies — and  it  was  rejected  !"  Go  home, 
if  you  can ;  go  home  if  you  dare,  to  your  constituents,  and  tell  them  that 
you  voted  it  down ;  meet,  if  you  can,  the  appalling  countenances  of  those 
who  sent  you  here,  and  tell  them  that  you  shrank  from  the  declaration  of 
your  own  sentiments ;  that  you  can  not  tell  how,  but  that  some  unknown 
dread,  some  indescribable  apprehension,  some  indefinable  danger,  drove  you 
from  your  purpose  ;  that  the  specters  of  cimeters,  and  crowns,  and  cres- 
cents, gleamed  before  you  and  alarmed  you  ;  and  that  you  suppressed  all 
the  noble  feelings  prompted  by  religion,  by  liberty,  by  national  independ- 
ence, and  by  humanity.  I  can  not  bring  myself  to  believe,  that  such  will 
be  the  feeling  of  a  majority  of  the  committee.  But,  for  myself,  though 
every  friend  of  the  cause  should  desert  it,  and  I  be  left  to  stand  alone  with 
the  gentleman  from  Massachusetts,  I  will  give  to  his  resolution  the  poor 
sanction  of  my  unqualified  approbation. 


ON    AMERICAN    INDUSTRY, 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OP  REPRESENTATIVES,  MARCH  30  and  31,  1824. 

[We  come  now  to  one  of  the  most  elaborate  compositions  of 
Mr.  Clay,  on  a  theme  in  which  he  always  felt  the  deepest  interest. 
No  one  can  read  the  following  speech  without  being  sensible  of 
the  patient  study  and  profound  investigation,  which  it  must  have 
cost  the  author.  Simple  and  unadorned,  as  Mr.  Clay's  style  al- 
ways is,  this  is,  nevertheless,  what  may  be  called  an  ornate,  as 
well  as  an  elaborate  production.  It  is  one  of  the  greatest  studies 
of  his  life,  and  the  subject  was  worthy  of  it — called  for  it.  We 
have  before  noticed  the  failure  of  the  tariff  bill  of  1820,  for  lack 
of  a  single  vote  in  the  Senate,  and  how  much  depended  upon  it. 
After  the  close  of  the  war  of  1812,  down  to  1820,  the  country 
had  suffered  incalculably  for  want  of  adequate  protection  to 
home  industry,  and  the  loss  of  the  tariff  of  1820  was  a  calamity 
the  extent  of  which  could  not  be  estimated.  Besides  the  almost 
total  paralysis  of  domestic  trade  and  foreign  commerce,  and  the 
painful  contraction. of  the  currency,  Mr.  Clay's  estimate  of  the 
average  depression  of  fifty  per  cent,  in  all  kinds  of  property  in  the 
country,  by  reason  of  these  misfortunes,  was  by  no  means  extrav- 
agant. AVhat  an  amazing  reckoning  this,  if  it  were  a  just  one  ! 
Four  years  from  1820,  the  country  had  gone  on  suffering  in  this 
manner,  in  addition  to  all  the  disadvantages  of  the  previous  four 
years,  from  1816  to  1820.  If  Mr.  Clay's  patriotism  could  ever 
prompt  him  to  a  great  effort — of  which  no  one  will  doubt — it 
was  during  the  pendency  of  the  tariff  bill  of  1824.  The  protec- 
tion of  American  manufactures  was  a  subject  of  which  Mr.  Clay 
was  now  perfect  master.  He  had  studied  it  profoundly  for  more 
than  twenty  years,  and  had  often  advocated  it,  first,  in  the  Legis- 
lature of  Kentucky,  and  afterward,  in  Congress.  He  had  closely 
observed  the  painful  experience  of  the  country  from  1816  to  1824, 
for  want  of  protection,  and  he  came  to  the  argument  of  the  fol- 
lowing speech  armed  with  facts,  and  stimulated  in  a  high  degree 
by  his  patriotic  zeal.     It  was  in  this  speech  that  his  American 


ON    AMERICAN    INDUSTRY.  255 

System  was  baptized  by  himself,  and  leaped  from  the  font,  to 
bear  that  name  forever  in  the  political  history  of  the  country. 
The  tariff  of  1824  passed  both  Houses  of  Congress,  was  approved 
by  the  president  (somewhat  reluctantly),  and  became  a  law.  In 
reference  to  this  tariff,  Mr.  Clay  said,  in  1832,  being  then  in  the 
Senate  :  "If  I  were  to  select  any  term  of  seven  years,  since  the 
adoption  of  the  present  Constitution,  which  exhibited  a  scene  of 
the  most  wide-spread  dismay  and  desolation,  it  would  be  exactly 
that  term  of  seven  years  which  immediately  preceded  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  tariff  of  1824  ;  and  if  the  term  of  seven  years 
were  to  be  selected,  of  the  greatest  prosperity  which  this  people 
have  enjoyed,  since  the  establishment  of  their  present  Constitu- 
tion, it  would  be  exactly  that  period  of  seven  years  which  imme- 
diately followed  the  passage  of  the  tariff  of  1824."  This  descrip- 
tion of  these  two  cycles  of  our  history  will,  perhaps,  be  enough 
to  commend  to  the  profoundest  consideration  the  following  great 
argument  of  Mr.  Clay,  when  it  is  considered,  that  it  was  greatly, 
not  to  say  chiefly,  influential,  in  procuring  the  adoption  of  the 
tariff  of  1824.  It  is  the  most  compact  and  best  constructed 
paper  that  was  ever  written  upon  the  subject — a  condensation  of 
Mr.  Clay's  thoughts,  of  his  reasonings,  and  of  the  fruits  of  his 
researches  on  this  theme,  for  a  quarter  of  a  century — all  brought 
to  bear  on  this  occasion.] 

The  gentleman  from  Virginia  (Mr.  Barbour)  has  embraced  the  occasion 
produced  by  the  proposition  of  the  gentleman  from  Tennessee  to  strike 
out  the  minimum  price  in  the  bill  on  cotton  fabrics,  to  express  his  senti- 
ments at  large  on  the  policy  of  the  pending  measure  ;  and  it  is  scarcely 
necessary  for  me  to  say  he  has  evinced  his  usual  good  temper,  ability,  and 
decorum.  The  parts  of  the  bill  are  so  intermingled  and  interwoven  to- 
gether, that  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  fitness  of  this  occasion  to  exhibit 
its  merits  or  its  defects.  It  is  my  intention,  with  the  permission  of  the 
committee,  to  avail  myself  also  of  this  opportunity,  to  present  to  its  con- 
sideration those  general  views,  as  they  appear  to  me,  of  the  true  policy  of 
this  country,  which  imperiously  demand  the  passage  of  this  bill.  I  am 
deeply  sensible,  Mr.  Chairman,  of  the  high  responsibility  of  my  present 
situation.  But  that  responsibility  inspires  me  with  no  other  apprehension 
than  that  I  shall  be  unable  to  fulfill  my  duty ;  with  no  other  solicitude 
than  that  I  may,  at  least,  in  some  small  degree,  contribute  to  recall  my 
country  from  the  pursuit  of  a  fatal  policy,  which  appears  to  me  iuevitably 
to  lead  to  its  impoverishment  and  ruin.  I  do  feel  most  awfully  this 
responsibility.  And,  if  it  were  allowable  for  us,  at  the  present  day,  to 
imitate  ancient  examples,  I  would  invoke  the  aid  of  the  Most  High.     I 


/ 


256  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

would  anxiously  and  fervently  implore  His  divine  assistance ;  that  He 
would  be  graciously  pleased  to  shower  on  my  country  His  richest  bless- 
ings ;  and  that  He  would  sustain,  on  this  interesting  occasion,  the  humble 
individual  who  stands  before  Him,  and  lend  him  the  power,  moral  and 
physical,  to  perform  the  solemn  duties  which  now  belong  to  his  public 
station. 

Two  classes  of  politicians  divide  the  people  of  the  United  States.  Ac- 
cording to  the  system  of  one,  the  produce  of  foreign  industry  should  be 
subjected  to  no  other  impost  than  such  as  may  be  necessary  to  provide  a 
public  revenue ;  and  the  produce  of  American  industry  should  be  left  to 
sustain  itself,  if  it  can,  with  no  other  than  that  incidental  protection,  in  its 
competition,  at  home  as  well  as  abroad,  with  rival  foreign  articles.  Ac- 
cording to  the  system  of  the  other  class,  while  they  agree  that  the  imposts 
should  be  mainly,  and  may  under  any  modification  be  safely,  relied  on  as  a 
fit  and  convenient  source  of  public  revenue,  they  would  so  adjust  and  ar- 
range the  duties  on  foreign  fabrics  as  to  afford  a  gradual  but  adequate  pro- 
tection to  American  industry,  and  lessen  our  dependence  on  foreign  nations, 
by  securing  a  certain  and  ultimately  a  cheaper  and  better  supply  of  our 
own  wants  from  our  own  abundant  resources.  Both  classes  are  equally 
sincere  in  their  respective  opinions,  equally  honest,  equally  patriotic,  and 
desirous  of  advancing  the  prosperity  of  the  country.  In  the  discussion  and 
consideration  of  these  opposite  opinions,  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining 
which  has  the  support  of  truth  and  reason,  we  should,  therefore,  exercise 
every  indulgence,  and  the  greatest  spirit  of  mutual  moderation  and  for- 
bearance. And,  in  our  deliberations  on  this  great  question,  we  should  look 
fearlessly  and  truly  at  the  actual  condition  of  the  country,  retrace  the 
causes  which  have  brought  us  into  it,  and  snatch,  if  possible,  a  view  of  the 
future.  We  should,  above  all,  consult  experience — the  experience  of  other 
nations,  as  well  as  our  own — as  our  truest  and  most  unerring  guide. 

In  casting  our  eyes  around  us,  the  most  prominent  circumstance  which 
fixes  our  attention,  and  challenges  our  deepest  regret,  is  the  general  distress 
which  pervades  the  whole  country.  It  is  forced  upon  us  by  numerous 
facts  of  the  most  incontestable  character.  It  is  indicated  by  the  diminish- 
ed exports  of  native  produce ;  by  the  depressed  and  reduced  state  of  our 
foreign  navigation  ;  by  our  diminished  commerce  ;  by  successive  unthresh- 
ed  crops  of  grain,  perishing  in  our  barns  and  barn-yards  for  the  want  of 
a  market ;  by  the  alarming  diminution  of  the  circulating  medium  ;  by  the 
numerous  bankruptcies,  not  limited  to  the  trading  classes,  but  extending 
to  all  orders  of  society  ;  by  a  universal  complaint  of  the  want  of  employ- 
ment, and  a  consequent  reduction  of  the  wages  of  labor ;  by  the  ravenous 
pursuit  after  public  situations,  not  for  the  sake  of  their  honors  and  the  per- 
formance of  their  public  duties,  but  as  a  means  of  private  subsistence  ;  by 
the  reluctant  resort  to  the  perilous  use  of  paper  money ;  by  the  interven- 
tion of  legislation  in  the  delicate  relation  between  debtor  and  creditor ; 
and,  above  all,  by  the  low  and  depressed  state  of  the  value  of  almost  every 


ON   AMERICAN    INDUSTRY.  257 

description  of  the  whole  mass  of  the  property  of  the  nation,  which  has,  on 
an  average,  sunk  not  less  than  ahout  fifty  per  centum  within  a  few  years. 
This  distress  pervades  every  part  of  the  Union,  every  class  of  society ;  all 
feel  it,  though  it  may  be  felt,  at  different  places,  in  different  degrees.  It  is 
like  the  atmosphere  which  surrounds  us — all  must  inhale  it,  and  none  can 
escape  it.  In  some  places  it  has  burst  upon  our  people,  without  a  single 
mitigating  circumstance  to  temper  its  severity.  In  others,  more  fortunate, 
slight  alleviations  have  been  experienced  in  the  expenditure  of  the  public 
revenue,  and  in  other  favoring  causes.  A  few  years  ago,  the  planting  in- 
terest consoled  itself  with  its  happy  exemptions,  but  it  has  now  reached 
this  interest  also,  which  experiences,  though  with  less  severity,  the  general 
suffering.  It  is  most  painful  to  me  to  attempt  to  sketch  or  to  dwell  on  the 
gloom  of  this  picture.  But  I  have  exaggerated  nothing.  Perfect  fidelity 
to  the  original  would  have  authorized  me  to  have  thrown  on  deeper  and 
darker  hues.  And  it  is  the  duty  of  the  statesman,  no  less  than  that  of  the 
physician,  to  survey,  with  a  penetrating,  steady,  and  undismayed  eye,  the 
actual  condition  of  the  subject  on  which  he  would  operate;  to  probe  to  the 
bottom  the  diseases  of  the  body  politic,  if  he  would  apply  efficacious  rem- 
edies. We  have  not,  thank  God,  suffered  in  any  great  degree  for  food. 
But  distress,  resulting  from  the  absence  of  a  supply  of  the  mere  physical 
wants  of  our  nature,  is  not  the  only  nor  perhaps  the  keenest  distress,  to 
which  we  may  be  exposed.  Moral  and  pecuniary  suffering  is,  if  possible, 
more  poignant.  It  plunges  its  victim  into  hopeless  despair.  It  poisons,  it 
paralyzes,  the  spring  and  source  of  all  useful  exertion.  Its  unsparing  ac- 
tion is  collateral  as  well  as  direct.  It  falls  with  inexorable  force  at  the 
same  time  upon  the  wretched  family  of  embarrassment  and  insolvency,  and 
upon  its  head.  They  are  a  faithful  mirror,  reflecting  back  upon  him,  at 
once,  his  own  frightful  image,  and  that,  no  less  appalling,  of  the  dearest  ob- 
jects of  his  affection.  What  is  the  cause  of  this  wide-spreading  distress, 
of  this  deep  depression,  which  we  behold  stamped  on  the  public  counte- 
nance ?  We  are  the  same  people.  We  have  the  same  country.  We  can 
not  arraign  the  bounty  of  Providence.  The  showers  still  fall  in  the  same 
grateful  abundance.  The  sun  still  casts  his  genial  and  vivifying  influence 
upon  the  land ;  and  the  land,  fertile  and  diversified  in  its  soils  as  ever, 
yields  to  the  industrious  cultivator,  in  boundless  profusion,  its  accustomed 
fruits,  its  richest  treasures.  Our  vigor  is  unimpaired.  Our  industry  has 
not  relaxed.  If  ever  the  accusation  of  wasteful  extravagance  could  be 
made  against  our  people,  it  can  not  now  be  justly  preferred.  They,  on  the 
contrary,  for  the  few  last  years,  at  least,  have  been  practicing  the  most  rig- 
id economy.  The  causes,  then,  of  our  present  affliction,  whatever  they  may 
be,  are  human  causes,  and  human  causes  not  chargeable  upon  the  people, 
in  their  private  and  individual  relations. 

What,  again  I  would  ask,  is  the  cause  of  the  unhappy  condition  of  our 
country,  which  I  have  faintly  depicted  ?  It  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact,  that 
during  almost  the  whole  existence  of  this  government,  we  have  shaped  our 

17 


258  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

industry,  our  navigation,  and  our  commerce,  in  reference  to  an  extraordi- 
nary war  in  Europe,  and  to  foreign  markets,  which  no  longer  exist ;  in  the 
fact,  that  we  have  depended  too  much  upon  foreign  sources  of  supply,  and 
excited  too  little  the  native ;  in  the  fact  that,  while  we  have-  cultivated, 
with  assiduous  care,  our  foreign  resources,  we  have  suffered  those  at  home 
to  wither,  in  a  state  of  neglect  and  abandonment. /\s 

The  consequence  of  the  termination  of  the  war  of  Europe  has  been,  the 
resumption  of  European  commerce,  European  navigation,  and  the  extension 
of  European  agriculture  and  European  industry,  in  all  its  branches. 
Europe,  therefore,  has  no  longer  occasion,  to  any  thing  like  the  same  ex- 
tent as  that  she  had  during  her  wars,  for  American  commerce,  American 
navigation,  the  produce  of  American  industry.  Europe,  in  commotion,  and 
convulsed  throughout  all  her  members,  is  to  America  no  longer  the  same 
Europe  as  she  is  now,  tranquil,  and  watching  with  the  most  vigilant  atten- 
tion all  her  own  peculiar  interests,  without  regard  to  the  operation  of  her 
policy  upon  us.  The  effect  of  this  altered  state  of  Europe  upon  us  has 
been  to  circumscribe  the  employment  of  our  marine,  and  greatly  to  reduce 
the  value  of  the  produce  of  our  .territorial  labor.  The  further  effect  of 
this  twofold  reduction  has  been,  to  decrease  the  value  of  all  property, 
whether  on  the  land  or  on  the  ocean,  and  which  I  suppose  to  be  about 
fifty  per  centum.  And  the  still  further  effect  has  been,  to  diminish  the 
amount  of  our  circulating  medium,  in  a  proportion  not  less,  by  its  trans- 
mission abroad,  or  its  withdrawal  by  the  banking  institutions,  from  a  ne- 
cessity which  they  could  not  control.  The  quantity  of  money,  in  whatever 
form  it  may  be,  which  a  nation  wants,  is  in  proportion  to  the  total  mass 
of  its  wealth,  and  to  the  activity  of  that  wealth.  A  nation  that  has  but 
little  wealth,  has  but  a  limited  want  of  money.  In  stating  the  fact,  there- 
fore, that  the  total  wealth  of  the  country  has  diminished,  within  a  few  years, 
in  a  ratio  of  about  fifty  per  centum,  we  shall,  at  once,  fully  comprehend 
the  inevitable  reduction  which  must  have  ensued,  in  the  total  quantity  of 
the  circulating  medium  of  the  country.  A  nation  is  most  prosperous 
when  there  is  a  gradual  and  untempting  addition  to  the  aggregate  of  its 
circulating  medium.  It  is  in  a  condition  the  most  adverse,  when  there 
is  a  rapid  diminution  in  the  quantity  of  the  circulating  medium,  and 
a  consequent  depression  in  the  value  of  property.  In  the  former  case,  the 
wealth  of  individuals  insensibly  increases,  and  income  keeps  ahead  of  ex- 
penditure. But  in  the  latter  instance,  debts  have  been  contracted,  engage- 
ments made,  and  habits  of  expense  established,  in  reference  to  the  ex- 
isting state  of  wealth  and  of  its  representative.  "When  these  come  to  be 
greatly  reduced,  individuals  find  their  debts  still  existing,  their  engage- 
ments unexecuted,  and  their  habits  inveterate.  They  see  themselves  in  the 
possession  of  the  same  property,  on  which,  in  good  faith,  they  had  bound 
themselves.^  But  that  property,  without  their  fault,  possesses  no  longer  the 
same  value ;  and  hence  discontent,  impoverishment,  and  ruin,  arise.  Let  us 
suppose,  Mr.  Chairman,  that  Europe  was  again  the  theater  of  such  a  gen- 


ON   AMERICAN   INDUSTRY.  259 

eral  war  as  recently  raged  throughout  all  her  dominions — such  a  state  of 
the  war  as  existed  in  her  greatest  exertions  and  in  our  greatest  prosperity ; 
instantly  there  would  arise  a  greedy  demand  for  the  surplus  produce  of  our 
industry,  for  our  commerce,  for  our  navigation.  The  langor  which  now 
prevails  in  our  cities,  and  in  our  sea-ports,  would  give  way  to  an  auimated 
activity.  Our  roads  and  rivers  would  be  crowded  with  the  produce  of  the 
interior.  Everywhere  we  should  witness  excited  industry.  The  precious 
metals  would  refiow  from  abroad  upon  us.  Banks,  which  have  maintained 
their  credit,  would  revive  their  business  ;  and  new  banks  would  be  estab- 
lished to  take  the  place  of  those  which  have  sunk  beneath  the  general 
pressure.  For  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  they  have  produced  our 
present  adversity ;  they  may  have  somewhat  aggravated  it,  but  they  were 
the  effect  and  the  evidence  of  our  prosperity.  Prices  would  again  get  up  ; 
the  former  value  of  property  would  be  restored.  And  those  embarrassed 
persons  who  have  not  been  already  overwhelmed  by  the  times,  would  sud- 
denly find,  in  the  augmented  value  of  their  property,  and  the  renewal  of 
their  business,  ample  means  to  extricate  themselves  from  all  their  difficul- 
ties. The  greatest  want  of  civilized  society  is,  a  market  for  the  sale  and 
exchange  of  the  surplus  of  the  produce  of  the  labor  of  its  members. 
This  market  may  exist  at  home  or  abroad,  or  both  ;  but  it  must  exist 
somewhere,  if  society  prospers ;  and,  wherever  it  does  exist,  it  should  be 
competent  to  the  absorption  of  the  entire  surplus  of  production.  It  is 
most  desirable  that  there  should  be  both  a  home  and  a  foreign  market 
But,  with  respect  to  their  relative  superiority,  I  can  not  entertain  a  doubt. 
The  home  market  is  first  in  order,  and  paramount  in  importance.  The 
object  of  the  bill  under  consideration,  is,  to  create  this  home  market,  and 
to  lay  the  foundations  of  a  genuine  American  policy.  It  is  opposed  ;  and 
it  is  incumbent  upon  the  partisans  of  the  foreign  policy  (terms  which  I 
shall  use  without  any  invidious  intent),  to  demonstrate  that  the  foreign 
market  is  an  adequate  vent  for  the  surplus  produce  of  our  labor.  But  is 
it  so  ?  First,  foreign  nations  can  not,  if  they  would,  take  our  surplus  pro- 
duce. If  the  source  of  supply,  no  matter  of  what,  increases  in  a  greater 
ratio  than  the  demand  for  that  supply,  a  glut  of  the  market  is  inevitable, 
even  if  we  suppose  both  to  remain  perfectly  unobstructed.  The  duplica- 
tion of  our  population  takes  place  in  terms  of  about  twenty-five  years. 
The  term  will  be  more  and  more  extended  as  our  numbers  multiply.  But 
it  will  be  a  sufficient  approximation  to  assume  this  ratio  for  the  present. 
We  increase,  therefore,  in  population,  at  the  rate  of  about  four  per  centum 
per  annum.  Supposing  the  increase  of  our  production  to  be  in  the  same 
ratio,  we  should,  every  succeeding  year,  have  of  surplus  produce,  four  per 
centum  more  than  that  of  the  preceding  year,  without  taking  into  the  ac- 
count the  differences  of  seasons  which  neutralize  each  other.     If,  therefore, 

*  ft 

we  are  to  rely  upon  the  foreign  market  exclusively,  foreign  consumption 
ought  to  be  shown  to  be  increasing  in  the  same  ratio  of  four  per  centum 
per  annum,  if  it  be  an  adequate  vent  for  our  surplus  produce.     But,  as  I 


260  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

have  supposed  the  measure  of  our  increasing  production  to  be  furnished 
by  that  of  our  increasing  population,  so  the  measure  of  their  power  of 
consumption  must  be  determined  by  that  of  the  increase  of  their  popula- 
tion. Now,  the  total  foreign  population,  who  consume  our  surplus  pro- 
duce, upon  an  average,  do  not  double  their  aggregate  number  in  a  shorter 
term  than  that  of  about  one  hundred  years.  Our  powers  of  produc- 
tion increase  then,  in  a  ratio  four  times  greater  than  their  powers  of  con- 
sumption. And  hence  their  utter  inability  to  receive  from  us  our  surplus 
produce. 

But,  secondly,  if  they  could,  they  will  not.  The  policy  of  all  Europe  is 
adverse  to  the  reception  of  our  agricultural  produce,  so  far  as  it  comes 
into  collision  with  its  own ;  and  under  that  limitation  we  are  absolutely 
forbid  to  enter  their  ports,  except  under  circumstances  which  deprive  them 
of  all  value  as  a  steady  market.  The  policy  of  all  Europe  rejects  those 
great  staples  of  our  country  which  consist  of  objects  of  human  subsistence. 
The  policy  of  all  Europe  refuses  to  receive  from  us  any  thing  but  those 
raw  materials  of  smaller  value,  essential  to  their  manufactures,  to  which 
they  can  give  a  higher  value,  with  the  exception  of  tobacco  and  rice,  which 
they  can  not  produce.  Even  Great  Britain,  to  which  'we  are  its  best  cus- 
tomer, and  from  which  we  receive  nearly  one  half  in  value  of  our  whole 
imports,  will  not  take  from  us  articles  of  subsistence  produced  in  our 
country  cheaper  than  can  be  produced  in  Great  Britain.  Iu  adopting  this 
exclusive  policy,  the  States  of  Europe  do  not~  inquire  what  is  best  for  us, 
but  what  suits  themselves  respectively;  they  do  not  take  jurisdiction  of 
the  question  of  our  interests,  but  limit  the  object  of  their  legislation  to 
that  of  the  conservation  of  their  own  peculiar  interests,  leaving  us  free  to 
prosecute  ours  as  we  please.  They  do  not  guide  themselves  by  that  roman- 
tic philanthropy,  which  we  see  displayed  here,  and  which  invokes  us  to 
continue  to  purchase  the  produce  of  foreign  industry,  without  regard  to 
the  state  or  prosperity  of  our  own,  that  foreigners  may  be  pleased  to  pur- 
chase the  few  remaining  articles  of  ours,  which  their  restricted  policy  has 
not  yet  absolutely  excluded  from  their  consumption.  What  sort  of  a 
figure  would  a  member  of  the  British  Parliament  have  made,  what  sort  of 
a  reception  would  his  opposition  have  obtained,  if  he  had  remonstrated 
against  the  passage  of  the  corn-law,  by  which  British  consumption  is 
limited  to  the  bread-stuffs  of  British  production,  to  the  entire  exclusion  of 
American,  and  stated,  that  America  could  not  and  would  not  buy  British 
manufactures,  if  Britain  did  not  buy  American  flour  ? 

Both  the  inability  and  the  policy  of  foreign  powers,  then,  forbid  us  to 
rely  upon  the  foreign  market,  as  being  an  adequate  vent  for  the  surplus 
produce  of  American  labor.  Now  let  us  see  if  this  general  reasoning  is 
not  fortified  and  confirmed  by  the  actual  experience  of  this  country.  If 
the  foreign  market  may  be  safely  relied  upon,  as  furnishing  an  adequate 
demand  for  our  surplus  produce,  then  the  official  documents  will  show  a 
progressive  increase,  from  year  to  year,  in  the  exports  of  our  native  pro- 


ON   AMERICAN   INDUSTRY.  261 

duce,  in  a  proportion  equal  to  that  which  I  have  suggested.     If,  on  the 
contrary,  we  shall  find  from  them  that,  for  a  long  term  of  past  years,  some 
of  our  most  valuable  staples  have  retrograded,  some  remained  stationary, 
and  others  advanced  but  little,  if  any,  in  amount,  with  the  exception  of  cot- 
ton, the  deductions  of  reason  and  the  lessons  of  experience  will  alike  com- 
mand us  to  withdraw  our  confidence  in  the  competency  of  the  foreign 
market.     The  total  amount  of  all  our  exports  of  domestic  produce  for  the 
year,  beginning  in  1*795,  and  ending  on  the  thirtieth  September,  1796, 
was  forty  millions  seven  hundred  and  sixty-four  thousand  and  ninety-seven. 
Estimating  the  increase  according  to  the  ratio  of  the  increase  of  our  pop- 
ulation, that  is,  at  four  per  centum  per  annum,  the  amount  of  the  exports 
of  the  same  produce,  in  the  year  ending  on  the  thirtieth  of  September  last, 
ought  to  have  been  eighty-five  millions  four  hundred  and  twenty  thousand 
eight  hundred  and  sixty-one.     It  was  in  fact,  only  forty-seven  millions  one 
hundred  and  fifty-five  thousand  four  hundred  and  eio-ht.     Takino-  the  aver- 
age  of  five  years,  from  1803  to  1807,  inclusive,  the  amount  of  native  pro- 
duce exported,  was  forty-three  millions  two  hundred  and  two  thousand 
seven  hundred  and  fifty-one  for  each  of  those  years.     Estimating  what  it 
ought  to  have  been,  during  the  last  year,  applying  the  principle  suggested 
to  that  amount,  there  should  have  been  exported  seventy-seven  millions 
seven  hundred  and  sixty-six  thousand  seven   hundred  and  fifty-one,  instead 
of  forty-seven  millions  one  hundred  and  fifty-five  thousand  four  hundred  and 
eight.     If  these  comparative  amounts  of  the  aggregate  actual  exports,  and 
what  they  ought  to  have  been,  be  discouraging,  we  shall  find,  on  descend- 
ing into  particulars,  still  less  cause  of  satisfaction.     The  export  of  tobacco 
in  1*791,  was  one  hundred  and  twelve  thousand  four  hundred  and  twenty- 
eight  hogsheads.     That  was  the  year  of  the  largest   exportation  of  that 
article;  but  it  is  the  only  instance  in  which  I  have  selected  the  maximum 
of  exportation.     The  amount  of  what  we  ought  to  have  exported  last  year, 
estimated  according  to  the  scale  of  increase  which   I  have  used,  is  two 
hundred  and  sixty-six  thousand  three  hundred  and  thirty-two  hogsheads. 
The  actual  export  was  ninety-nine  thousand  and  nine  hogsheads.     We  ex- 
ported, in   1803,  the  quantity  of  one   million  three  hundred  and  eleven 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  fifty-three  barrels  of  flour  ;  and  ought  to  have 
exported  last  year,  two  millions  three  hundred  and  sixty-one  thousand 
three  hundred  and  thirty-three  barrels.     We,  in  fact,  exported  only  seven 
hundred  and  fifty-six  thousand  seven  hundred  and  two  barrels.     Of  that 
quantity,  we  sent  to  South  America  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  barrels, 
according  to  a  statement  furnished  me  by  the  diligence  of  a  friend  near 
me    (Mr.  Poinsett),  to  whose  valuable  mass  of  accurate  information,  in  re- 
gard to  that  interesting  quarter  of  the  world,  I  have  had  occasion  fre- 
quently to  apply.     But  that  demand   is   temporary,  growing  out  of  the 
existing  state  of  war.     Whenever  peace  is  restored  to  it,  and  I  now  hope 
that  the  day  is  not  distant  when  its  independence  will  be  generally  acknowl- 
edged, there  can  not  be  a  doubt  that  it  will  supply  its  own  consumption. 


262  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

In  all  parts  of  it,  the  soil,  either  from  climate  or  from  elevation,  is  well 
adapted  to  tbe  culture  of  wheat ;  and  nowhere  can  better  wheat  be  pro- 
duced, than  in  some  portions  of  Mexico  and  Chili.  Still  the  market  of 
South  America,  is  one  which,  on  other  accounts,  deserves  the  greatest  con- 
sideration. And  I  congratulate  you,  the  committee,  and  the  country,  on 
the  recent  adoption  of  a  more  auspicious  policy  toward  it. 

We  exported,  in  1803,  Indian  corn  to  the  amount  of  two  millions  seven- 
ty-four thousand  six  hundred  and  eight  bushels.  The  quantity  should  have 
been,  in  1823,  three  millions  seven  hundred  and  thirty-four  thousand  two 
hundred  and  eighty-eight  bushels.  The  actual  quantity  exported,  was 
seven  hundred  and  forty-nine  thousand  and  thirty-four  bushels,  or  about 
one  fifth  of  what  it  should  have  been,  and  a  little  more  than  one  third  of 
what  it  was  more  than  twenty  years  ago.  We  ought  not,  then,  to  be  sur- 
prised at  the  extreme  depression  of  the  price  of  that  article,  of  which  I 
have  heard  my  honorable  friend  (Mr.  Bassett)  complain,  nor  of  the  distress 
of  the  corn-growing  districts  adjacent  to  the  Chesapeake  Bay.  We  export- 
ed seventy-seven  thousand  nine  hundred  and  thirty-four  barrels  of  beef  in 
1803,  and  last  year  but  sixty-one  thousand  four  hundred  and  eighteen,  in- 
stead of  one  hundred  and  forty  thousand  two  hundred  and  seventy-four 
barrels.  In  the  same  year  (1803)  we  exported  ninety-six  thousand  six 
hundred  and  two  barrels  of  pork,  and  last  year  fifty-five  thousand  five  hun- 
dred and  twenty-nine,  instead  of  one  hundred  and  seventy-three  thousand 
eight  hundred  and  eighty-two  barrels.  Rice  ha^  not  advanced,  by  any 
means,  in  the  proportion,  which  it  ought  to  have  done.  All  the  small  ar- 
ticles, such  as  cheese,  butter,  candles,  and  so  forth,  too  minute  to  detail, 
but  important  in  their  aggregate,  have  also  materially  diminished.  Cotton 
alone  has  advanced.  But,  while  the  quantity  of  it  is  augmented,  its  actual 
value  is  considerably  diminished.  The  total  quantity  last  year,  exceeded 
that  of  the  preceding  year,  by  nearly  thirty  millions  of  pounds.  And  yet 
the  total  value  of  the  year  of  smaller  exportation,  exceeded  that  of  the  last 
year  by  upward  of  three  and  a  half  millions  of  dollars.  If  this  article,  the 
capacity  of  our  country  to  produce  wdiich  was  scarcely  known  in  1790, 
were  subtracted  from  the  mass  of  our  exports,  the  value  of  the  residue 
would  only  be  a  little  upward  of  twenty-seven  millions  during  the  last 
year.  The  distribution  of  the  articles  of  our  exports  throughout  the  United 
States,  can  not  fail  to  fix  the  attention  of  the  committee.  Of  the  forty- 
seven  millions  one  hundred  aud  fifty-five  thousand  four  hundred  and  eight' 
to  which  they  amounted  last  year,  three  articles  alone  (cotton,  rice,  and  to- 
bacco) composed  together  twenty-eight  millions  five  hundred  and  forty- 
nine  thousand  one  hundred  and  seventy-seven.  Now  these  articles  are 
chiefly  produced  at  the  South.  And  if  we  estimate  that  portion  of  our  pop- 
ulation who  are  actually  engaged  in  their  culture,  it  would  probably  not 
exceed  two  millions.  Thus,  then,  less  than  one  fifth  of  the  whole  popula- 
tion of  the  United  States  produced  upward  of  one  half,  nearly  two  thirds, 
of  the  entire  value  of  the  exports  of  the  last  year. 


ON    AMERICAN    INDUSTRY.  26*3 

Is  this  foreign  market,  so  incompetent  at  present,  and  which,  limited  as 
its  demands  are,  operates  so  unequally  upon  the  productive  lahor  of  our 
country,  likely  to  improve  in  future  ?  If  I  am  correct  in  the  views  which  I 
have  presented  to  the  committee,  it  must  become  worse  and  worse.  What 
can  improve  it  ?  Europe  will  not  abandon  her  own  agriculture  to  foster 
ours.  We  may  even  anticipate  that  she  will  more  and  more  enter  into 
competition  with  us  in  the  supply  of  the  West  India  market.  That  of  South 
America,  for  articles  of  subsistence,  will  probably  soon  vanish.  The  value 
of  our  exports,  for  the  future,  may  remain  at  about  what  it  was  last  year. 
But,  if  we  do  not  create  some  new  market ;  if  we  persevere  in  the  existing 
pursuits  of  agriculture,  the  inevitable  consequence  must  be,  to  augment 
greatly  the  quantity  of  our  produce,  and  to  lessen  its  value  in  the  foreign 
market.  Can  there  be  a  doubt  on  this  point  ?  Take  the  article  of  cotton, 
for  example,  which  is  almost  the  only  article  that  now  remunerates  labor 
and  capital.  A  certain  description  of  labor  is  powerfully  attracted  toward 
the  cotton-growing  country.'  The  cultivation  will  be  greatly  extended,  the 
aggregate  amount  annually  produced,  will  be  vastly  augmented.  The  price 
will  fall.  The  more  unfavorable  soils  will  then  be  gradually  abandoned. 
And  I  have  no  doubt  that,  in  a  few  years,  it  will  cease  to  be  profitably  pro- 
duced, anywhere  north  of  the  thirty-fourth  degree  of  latitude.  But,  in  the 
mean  time,  large  numbers  of  the  cotton-growers  will  suffer  the  greatest  dis- 
tress. And  while  this  distress  is  brought  upon  our  own  country,  foreign 
industry  will  be  stimulated  by  the  very  cause  which  occasions  our  distress. 
For,  by  surcharging  the  markets  abroad,  the  price  of  the  raw  material 
being  reduced,  the  manufacturer  will  be  able  to  supply  cotton  fabrics 
cheaper ;  and  the  consumption,  in  his  own  country,  and  in  foreign  nations, 
other  than  ours  (where  the  value  of  the  import  must  be  limited  to  the 
value  of  the  export,  which  I  have  supposed  to  remain  the  same),  being  pro- 
portionably  extended,  there  will  be  consequently,  an  increased  demand  for 
the  produce  of  his  industry. 

Our  agriculture  is  our  greatest  interest.  It  ought  ever  to  be  predominant. 
All  others  should  bend  to  it.  And,  in  considering  what  is  for  its  advantage, 
we  should  contemplate  it  in  all  its  varieties,  of  planting,  farming  and  grazino-. 
Can  we  do  nothing  to  invigorate  it ;  nothing  to  correct  the  errors  of  the 
past,  and  to  brighten  the  still  more  unpromising  prospects  which  lie  before 
us  ?  We  have  seen,  I  think,  the  causes  of  the  distresses  of  the  country.  We 
have  seen,  that  an  exclusive  dependence  upon  the  foreign  market  must  lead 
to  still  severer  distress,  to  impoverishment,  to  ruin.  We  must  then  change 
somewhat  our  course.  We  must  give  a  new  direction  to  some  portion 
of  our  industry.  We  must  speedily  adopt  a  genuine  American  policy. 
Still  cherishing  the  foreign  market,  let  us  create  also  a  home  market,  to 
give  further  scope  to  the  consumption  of  the  produce  of  American  in- 
dustry. Let  us  counteract  the  policy  of  foreigners,  and  withdraw  the  sup- 
port which  we  now  give  to  their  industry,  and  stimulate  that  of  our  own 
country.     It  should  be  a  prominent  object  with  wise  legislators,  to  multi- 


264  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY    CLAY. 

ply  the  vocations  aud  extend  the  business  of  society,  as  far  as  is  can  be 
done,  by  the  protection  of  our  interests  at  home,  against  the  injurious  ef- 
fects of  foreign  legislation.  Suppose  we  -were  a  nation  of  fishermen,  or  of 
skippers,  to  the  exclusion  of  every  other  occupation,  and  the  Legislature 
had  the  power  to  introduce  the  pursuits  of  agriculture  and  manufactures, 
would  not  our  happiness  be  promoted  by  an  exertion  of  its  authority  ? 
All  the  existing  employments  of  society — the  learned  professions — com- 
merce— agriculture — are  now  overflowing.  We  stand  in  each  other's  way. 
Hence  the  want  of  employment.  Hence  the  eager  pursuit  after  public 
stations,  which  I  have  before  glanced  at.  I  have  been  again  and  again 
shocked,  during  this  session,  by  instances  of  solicitation  for  places,  before 
the  vacancies  existed.  The  pulse  of  incumbents,  who  happen  to  be  taken 
ill,  is  not  marked  with  more  anxiety  by  the  attending  physicians,  than  by 
those  who  desire  to  succeed  them,  though  with  very  opposite  feelings. 
Our  old  friend,  the  faithful  sentinel,  who  has  stood  so  long  at  our  door,  and 
the  gallantry  of  whose  patriotism  deserves  to  be  noticed,  because  it  was 
displayed  when  that  virtue  was  most  rare  and  most  wanted,  on  a  memor- 
able occasion  in  this  unfortunate  city,  became  indisposed  some  weeks  ago. 
The  first  intelligence  which  I  had  of  his  dangerous  illness,  was  by  an  ap- 
plication for  his  unvacated  place.  I  hastened  to  assure  myself  of  the  ex- 
tent of  his  danger,  and  was  happy  to  find  that  the  eagerness  of  succession 
outstripped  the  progress  of  disease.  By  creating  a  new  and  extensive 
business,  then,  we  would  not  only  give  employment  to  those  who  want  it, 
and  augment  the  sum  of  national  wealth,  by  all  that  this  new  business 
would  create,  but  we  should  meliorate  the  condition  of  those  who  are  now 
engaged  in  existing  employments.  In  Europe,  particularly  Great  Britain, 
their  large  standing  armies,  large  navies,  large  even  on  their  peace  arrange- 
ment, their  established  church,  afford  to  their  population  employments, 
which,  in  that  respect,  the  happier  Constitution  of  our  government  does 
not  tolerate  but  in  a  very  limited  degree.  The  peace  establishments  of  our 
army  and  our  navy,  are  extremely  small,  and  I  hope  ever  will  be.  We 
have  no  established  church,  and  I  trust  never  shall  have.  In  proportion  as 
the  enterprise  of  our  citizens  in  public  employments  is  circumscribed,  should 
we  excite  aud  invigorate  it  in  private  pursuits. 

The  creation  of  a  home  market  is  not  only  necessary  to  procure  for  our 
agriculture  a  just  reward  for  its  labors,  but  it  is  indispensable  to  obtain  a 
supply  for  our  necessary  wants.  If  we  can  not  sell,  we  can  not  buy.  That 
portion  of  our  population  (and  we  have  seen  that  it  is  not  less  than  four 
fifths),  which  makes  comparatively  nothing  that  foreigners  will  buy,  has 
nothing  to  make  purchases  with  from  foreigners.  It  is  in  vain  that  we 
are  told  of  the  amount  of  our  exports  supplied  by  the  planting  interest. 
They  may  enable  the  planting  interest  to  supply  all  its  wants  ;  but  they 
bring  no  ability  to  the  interests  not  planting ;  unless,  which  can  not  be 
pretended,  the  planting  interest  was  an  adequate  vent  for  the  surplus  pro- 
duce of  the  labor  of  all  other  interests.      It  is  in  vain  to  tantalize  us  with 


ON    AMERICAN    INDUSTRY.  265 

the  greater  cheapness  of  foreign  fabrics.  There  must  be  an  ability  to  pur- 
chase, if  an  article  be  obtained,  whatever  may  be  the  price,  high  or  low, 
at  which  it  is  sold.  And  a  cheap  article  is  as  much  beyond  the  grasp  of 
him  who  has  no  means  to  buy,  as  a  high  one.  Even  if  it  were  true  that 
the  American  manufacturer  would  supply  consumption  at  dearer  rates,  it 
is  better  to  have  his  fabrics  than  the  unattainable  foreign  fabrics;  because 
it  is  better  to  be  ill  supplied  than  not  supplied  at  all.  A  coarse  coat, 
which  will  communicate  warmth  and  cover  nakedness,  is  better  than  no 
coat.  The  superiority  of  the  home  market  results,  first,  from  its  steadiness 
and  comparative  certainty  at  all  times  ;  secondly,  from  the  creation  of  re- 
ciprocal interest ;  thirdly,  from  its  greater  security ;  and,  lastly,  from  an 
ultimate  and  not  distant  augmentation  of  consumption  (and  consequently 
of  comfort),  from  increased  quantity  and  reduced  prices.  But  this  home 
market,  highly  desirable  as  it  is,  can  only  be  created  and  cherished  by  the 
protection  of  our  own  legislation  against  the  inevitable  prostration  of  our 
industry,  which  must  ensue  from  the  action  of  foreign  policy  and  legisla- 
tion. The  effect  and  the  value  of  this  domestic  care  of  our  own  interests 
will  be  obvious  from  a  few  facts  and  considerations.  Let  us  suppose  that 
half  a  million  of  persons  are  now  employed  abroad  in  fabricating,  for  our 
consumption,  those  articles,  of  which,  by  the  operation  of  this  bill,  a  supply 
is  intended  to  be  provided  within  ourselves.  That  half  a  million  of  persons 
are,  in  effect,  subsisted  by  us  ;  but  their  actual  means  of  subsistence  are 
drawn  from  foreign  agriculture.  If  we  could  transport  them  to  this 
country,  and  incorporate  them  in  the  mass  of  our  own  population,  there 
would  instantly  arise  a  demand  for  an  amount  of  provisons  equal  to  that 
which  would  be  requisite  for  their  subsistence  throughout  the  whole  year. 
That  demand,  in  the  article  of  flour  alone,  would  not  be  less  than  the 
quantity  of  about  nine  hundred  thousand  barrels,  besides  a  proportionate 
quantity  of  beef,  and  pork,  and  other  articles  of  subsistence.  But  nine 
hundred  thousand  barrels  of  flour  exceeds  the  entire  quantity  exported  last 
year,  by  nearly  one  huudred  and  fifty  thousand  barrels.  What  activity 
would  not  this  give,  what  cheerfulness  would  it  not  communicate,  to  our 
now  dispirited  farming  interest !  But  if,  instead  of  these  five  hundred 
thousand  artizans  emigrating  from  abroad,  we  give  by  this  bill  employment 
to  an  equal  number  of  our  own  citizens,  now  engaged  in  unprofitable  agri- 
culture, or  idle  from  the  want  of  business,  the  beneficial  effect  upon  the 
productions  of  our  farming  labor  would  be  nearly  doubled.  The  quantity 
would  be  diminished  by  a  subtraction  of  the  produce  from  the  labor  of  all 
those  who  should  be  diverted  from  its  pursuits  to  manufacturing  industry, 
and  the  value  of  the  residue  would  be  enhanced,  both  by  that  diminution 
and  the  creation  of  the  home  market,  to  the  extent  supposed.  And  the 
honorable  gentleman  from  Virginia  may  repress  any  apprehensions  which 
he  entertains,  that  the  plow  will  be  abandoned,  and  our  fields  remain  un- 
sown. For,  under  all  the  modifications  of  social  industry,  if  you  will  secure 
to  it  a  just  reward,  the  greater  attractions  of  agriculture  will  give  to  it 


2G6  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

that  proud  superiority  which  it  has  always  maintained.  If  we  suppose  no 
actual  abandonment  of  farming,  but,  what  is  most  likely,  a  gradual  and 
imperceptible  employment  of  population  in  the  business  of  manufacturing, 
instead  of  being  compelled  to  resort  to  agriculture,  the  salutary  effect 
would  be  nearly  the  same.  Is  any  part  of  our  common  country  likely  to 
be  injured  by  a  transfer  of  the  theater  of  fabrication,  for  our  own  con- 
sumption, from  Europe  to  America  ?  All  that  those  parts,  if  any  there  be, 
which  will  not,  and  can  not  engage  in  manufactures,  should  require,  is, 
that  their  consumption  should  be  well  supplied  ;  and  if  the  objects  of  that 
consumption  are  produced  in  other  parts  of  the  Union,  that  can  manufac- 
ture, far  from  having  on  that  account  any  just  cause  of  complaint,  their 
patriotism  will  and  ought  to  inculcate  a  cheerful  acquiescence  in  what  es- 
sentially contributes,  and  is  indispensably  necessary,  to  the  prosperity  of  the 
common  family. 

The  great  desideratum  in  political  economy  is  the  same  as  in  private 
pursuits ;  that  is,  what  is  the  best  application  of  the  aggregate  industry 
of  a  nation,  that  can  be  made  honestly  to  produce  the  largest  sum  of  na- 
tional wealth  ?  Labor  is  the  source  of  all  wealth  ;  but  it  is  not  natural  labor 
only.  And  the  fundamental  error  of  the  gentleman  from  Virginia,  and  of 
the  school  to  which  he  belongs,  in  deducing,  from  our  sparse  population, 
our  unfitness  for  the  introduction  of  the  arts,  consists  in  their  not  sufficiently 
weighing  the  importance  of  the  power  of  machinery.  In  former  times, 
when  but  little  comparative  use  was  made  of  machinery,  manual  labor, 
and  the  price  of  wages,  were  circumstances  of  the  greatest  consideration. 
But  it  is  far  otherwise  in  these  latter  times.  Such  are  the  improvements 
and  the  perfection  of  machinery,  that,  in  analyzing  the  compound  value 
of  many  fabrics,  the  element  of  natural  labor  is  so  inconsiderable  as  almost 
to  escape  detection.  This  truth  is  demonstrated  by  many  facts.  Formerly, 
Asia,  in  consequence  of  the  density  of  the  population,  and  the  consequent 
lowness  of  wages,  laid  Europe  under  tribute  for  many  of  her  fabrics. 
Now  Europe  reacts  upon  Asia,  and  Great  Britain,  in  particular,  throws 
back  upon  her  countless  millions  of  people  the  rich  treasures  produced  by 
artificial  labor,  to  a  vast  amount,  infinitely  cheaper  than  they  can  be  manu- 
factured by  the  natural  exertions  of  that  portion  of  the  globe.  But  Britain 
is  herself  the  most  striking  illustration  of  the  immense  power  of  machinery. 
Upon  what  other  principle  can  you  account  for  the  enormous  wealth  which 
she  has  accumulated,  and  which  she  annually  produces  1  A  statistical 
writer  of  that  country,  several  years  ago,  estimated  the  total  amount  of  the 
artificial  or  machine  labor  of  the  nation,  to  be  equal  to  that  of  one  hun- 
dred millions  of  able-bodied  laborers.  Subsequent  estimates  of  her  arti- 
ficial labor,  at  the  present  day,  carry  it  to  the  enormous  height  of  two 
hundred  millions.  But  the  population  of  the  three  kingdoms  is  twenty- 
one  millions  five  hundred  thousand.  Supposing,  that  to  furnish  able-bodied 
labor  to  the  amount  of  four  millions,  the  natural  labor  will  be  but  two  per 
centum  of  the  artificial  labor.     In  the  production  of  wealth  she  operates, 


ON   AMERICAN   INDUSTRY.  267 

therefore,  by  a  power  (including  the  whole  population)  of  two  hundred 
and  twenty-one  millions  five  hundred  thousand  ;  or,  in  other  words,  by 
a  power  eleven  times  greater  than  the  total  of  her  natural  power.  If  we 
suppose  the  machine-labor  of  the  United  States  to  be  equal  to  that  of  ten 
millions  of  able-bodied  men,  the  United  States  will  operate,  in  the  creation 
of  wealth,  by  a  power  (including  all  their  population)  of  twenty  millions. 
In  the  creation  of  wealth,  therefore,  the  power  of  Great  Britain,  compared 
to  that  of  the  United  States,  is  as  eleven  to  one.  That  these  views  are 
not  imaginary,  will  be,  I  think,  evinced  by  contrasting  the  wealth,  the  rev- 
enue, the  power,  of  the  two  countries.  Upon  what  other  hypothesis  can 
we  explain  those  almost  incredible  exertions  which  Britain  made  during 
the  late  wars  of  Europe  ?  Look  at  her  immense  subsidies  !  Behold  her 
standing,  unaided  and  alone,  and  breasting  the  storm  of  Napoleon's  co- 
lossal power,  when  all  continental  Europe  owned  and  yielded  to  its  irresist- 
ible sway ;  and  finally,  contemplate  her  vigorous  prosecution  of  the  war, 
with  and  without  allies,  to  its  splendid"  termination  on  the  ever-memorable 
field  of  Waterloo  !  The  British  works  which  the  gentleman  from  Virginia 
has  quoted,  portray  a  state  of  the  most  wonderful  prosperity,  in  regard  to 
wealth  and  resources,  that  ever  was  before  contemplated.  Let  us  look  a 
little  into  the  semi-official  pamphlet,  written  with  great  force,  clearness, 
and  ability,  and  the  valuable  work  of  Lowe,  to  both  of  which  that  gen- 
tleman has  referred.  The  revenue  of  the  United  Kingdom  amounted, 
during  the  latter  years  of  the  war,  to  seventy  millions  of  pounds  sterling ; 
and  one  year  it  rose  to  the  astonishing  height  of  ninety  millions  sterling, 
equal  to  four  hundred  millions  of  dollars.  This  was  actual  revenue,  made 
up  of  real  contributions,  from  the  purses  of  the  people.  After  the  close 
of  the  war,  ministers  slowly  and  reluctantly  reduced  the  military  and  naval 
establishments,  and  accommodated  them  to  a  state  of  peace.  The  pride 
of  power,  everywhere  the  same,  always  unwillingly  surrenders  any  of  those 
circumstances,  which  display  its  pomp  and  exhibit  its  greatness.  Cotem- 
poraneous  with  this  reduction,  Britain  was  enabled  to  lighten  some  of  the 
heaviest  burdens  of  taxation,  and  particularly  that  most  onerous  of  all, 
the  income  tax.  In  this  lowered  state,  the  revenue  of  peace,  gradually 
rising  from  the  momentary  depression  incident  to  a  transition  fsom  war, 
attained,  in  1822,  the  vast  amount  of  fifty-five  millions  sterling,  upward 
of  two  hundred  and  forty  millions  of  dollars,  and  more  than  eleven  times 
that  of  the  United  States  for  the  same  year ;  thus  indicating  the  difference, 
which  I  have  suggested,  in  the  respective  productive  powers  of  the  two 
countries.  The  excise  alone  (collected  under  twenty-five  different  heads) 
amounted  to  twenty-eight  millions,  more  than  one  half  of  the  total 
revenue  of  the  kingdom.  This  great  revenue  allows  Great  Britain  to  con- 
stitute an  efficient  sinking  fund  of  five  millions  sterling,  beim?  an  excess 
of  actual  income  beyond  expenditure,  and  amounting  to  more  than  the 
entire  revenue  of  the  United  States. 

If  we  look  at  the  commerce  of  England,  we  shall  perceive  that  its  pros- 


268  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

perous  condition  no  less  denotes  the  immensity  of  her  riches.  The  average 
of  three  years'  exports,  ending  in  1789,  was  between  thirteen  and  fourteen 
millions.  The  average  for  the  same  term,  ending  in  1822,  was  forty  mil- 
lions sterling.  The  average  of  the  imports  for  three  years,  ending  in  1789, 
was  seventeen  millions.  The  average  for  the  same  term,  ending  in  1822, 
was  thirty-six  millions,  showing  a  favorable  balance  of  four  millions.  Thus, 
in  a  period  not  longer  than  that  which  has  elapsed  since  the  establishment 
of  our  Constitution,  have  the  exports  of  that  kingdom  been  tripled ;  and 
this  has  mainly  been  the  effect  of  the  power  of  machinery.  The  total 
amount  of  the  commerce  of  Great  Britain  is  greater  since  the  peace,  by 
one  fourth,  than  it  was  during  the  war.  The  average  of  her  tonnage, 
during  the  most  flourishing  period  of  the  war,  was  two  millions  four  hun- 
dred thousand  tons.  Its  average,  during  the  three  years,  1819,  1820,  and 
1821,  was  two  millions  six  hundred  thousand — exhibiting  an  increase  of 
two  hundred  thousand  tons.  If  we  glance  at  some  of  the  more  prominent 
articles  of  her  manufactures,  we  shall  be  assisted  in  comprehending  the 
true  nature  of  the  sources  of  her  riches.  The  amount  of  cotton  fabrics  ex- 
ported, in  the  most  prosperous  year  of  the  war,  was  eighteen  millions 
sterling.  In  the  year  1820,  it  was  sixteen  millions  six  hundred  thousand  ; 
in  1821,  twenty  millions  five  hundred  thousand;  in  1822,  twenty-one  mil- 
lions six  hundred  and  thirty-nine  thousand  pounds  sterling — presenting  the 
astonishing  increase,  in  two  years,  of  upward  of  five  millions.  The  total 
amount  of  imports  in  Great  Britain,  from  all  foreign  ports,  of  the  article 
of  cotton  wool,  is  five  millions  sterling.  After  supplying  most  abundantly 
the  consumption  of  cotton  fabrics  within  the  country*  (and  a  people  better 
fed,  and  clad,  and  housed,  are  not  to  be  found  under  the  sun  than  the 
British  nation)  by  means  of  her  industry,  she  gives  to  this  .cotton  wool  a 
new  value,  which  enables  her  to  sell  to  foreign  nations  to  the  amount  of 
twenty-one  millions  six  hundred  and  thirty-nine  thousand  pounds,  making 
a  clear  profit  of  upward  of  sixteen  millions  five  hundred  thousand  pounds 
sterling!  In  1821,  the  value  of  the  export  of  woolen  manufactures  was 
four  millions  three  hundred  thousand  pounds.  In  1822,  it  was  five  mil- 
lions five  hundred  thousand  pounds.  The  success  of  her  restrictive  policy 
is  strikingly  illustrated  in  the  article  of  silk.  In  the  manufacture  of  that 
article  she  labors  under  great  disadvantages,  besides  that  of  not  producing 
the  raw  material.  She  has  subdued  them  all,  and  the  increase  of  the 
manufacture  has  been  most  rapid.  Although  she  is  still  unable  to  main- 
tain, in  foreign  countries,  a  successful  competition  with  the  silks  of  France, 
of  India,  and  of  Italy,  and  therefore  exports  but  little,  she  gives  to  the  two 
millions  of  the  raw  material  which  she  imports,  in  various  forms,  a  value 
often  millions,  which  chiefly  enter  into  British  consumption.  Let  us  sup- 
pose that  she  was  dependent  upon  foreign  nations  for  these  ten  millions, 
what  an  injurious  effect  would  it  not  have  upon  her  commercial  relations 
with  them !  The  average  of  the  exports  of  British  manufactures,  during 
the  peace,  exceeds  the  average  of  the  most  productive  years  of  the  war. 


ON    AMERICAN   INDUSTRY.  269 

The  amount  of  her  wealth,  annually  produced,  is  three  hundred  and  fifty 
millions  sterling ;  bearing  a  large  proportion  to  all  of  her  pre-existing  wealth. 
The  agricultural  portion  of  it  is  said,  by  the  gentleman  from  Virginia,  to 
be  greater  than  that  created  by  any  other  branch  of  her  industry.  But 
that  flows  mainly  from  a  policy  similar  to  that  proposed  by  this  bill.  One 
third  only  of  her  population  is  engaged  in  agriculture  ;  the  other  two 
thii'ds  furnishing  a  market  for  the  produce  of  that  third.  Withdraw  this 
market,  and  what  becomes  of  her  agriculture  ?  The  power  and  the  wealth 
of  Great  Britain  can  not  be  more  strikingly  illustrated  than  by  a  compari- 
son of  her  population  and  revenue  with  those  of  other  countries  and  with 
our  own.  [Here  Mr.  Clay  exhibited  the  following  table,  made  out  from 
authentic  materials.] 

Russia  in  Europe, 

France,  including  Corsica, 

Great  Britain,  exclusive  of  Ireland  ~) 

(the  taxes   computed  according  ; 

to  the   value  of  nionev  on   the  f 

European  continent).  J 

Great  Britain  and  Ireland  collectively, 
England  alone, 
Spain, 
Ireland, 
The  United  States  of  America, 

From  this  exhibit  we  must  remark,  that  the  wealth  of  Great  Britain,  and 
consequently  her  power,  is  greater  than  that  of  any  of  the  other  nations  with 
which  it  is  compared.  The  amount  of  the  contributions  which  she  draws 
from  the  pockets  of  her  subjects  is  not  referred  to  for  imitation,  but  as  in- 
dicative of  their  wealth.  The  burden  of  taxation  is  always  relative  to  the 
ability  of  the  subjects  of  it.  A  poor  nation  can  pay  but  little.  And  the 
heavier  taxes  of  British  subjects,  for  example,  in  consequence  of  their 
greater  wealth,  may  be  more  easily  borne  than  the  much  lighter  taxes  of 
Spanish  subjects,  in  consequence  of  their  extreme  poverty.  The  object  of 
wise  governments  should  be,  by  sound  legislation,  so  to  protect  the  indus- 
try of  their  own  citizens  against  the  policy  of  foreign  powers,  as  to  give  to 
it  the  most  expansive  force  in  the  production  of  wealth.  Great  Britain 
has  ever  acted,  and  still  acts,  on  this  policy.  She  has  pushed  her  protec- 
tion of  British  interest  further  than  any  other  nation  has  fostered  its  in- 
dustry. The  result  is,  greater  wealth  among  her  subjects,  and  consequently 
greater  ability  to  pay  their  public  burdens.  If  their  taxation  is  estimated 
by  their  natural  labor  alone,  nominally  it  is  greater  than  the  taxation  of 
the  subjects  of  any  other  power.  But,  if  on  a  scale  of  their  national  and 
artificial  labor,  compounded,  it  is  less  than  the  taxation  of  any  other  peo- 
ple. Estimating  it  on  that  scale,  and  assuming  the  aggregate  of  the  natural 
and   artificial  labor  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  be  what  I  have  already 


Population. 

Taxes  &  public 

Taxation 

burdens. 

per  capita. 

37,000,000 

£17,000,000 

£0     9     9 

30,700,000 

3T,  000,000 

14     0 

14,500,000 

40,000,000 

2  15     0 

21,500  000 

44,000,000 

2     0     0 

11,600,000 

36,000,000 

3     2     0 

11,000,000 

6,000,000 

0   11     0 

7,000,000 

4,000,000 

0  11     0 

10,000,000 

4,500,000 

0     9     0 

270  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

slated,  two  hundred  and  twenty-one  millions  five  hundred  thousand,  the 
actual  taxes  paid  by  a  British  subject  are  only  about  three  and  seven-pence 
sterling.  Estimating  our  own  taxes  on  a  similar  scale — that  is,  supposing 
both  descriptions  of  labor  to  be  equal  to  that  of  twenty  millions  of  able- 
bodied  persons — tbe  amount  of  tax  paid  by  each  soul  in  the  United  States 
is  four  shillings  and  six-pence  sterling. 

The  committee  will  observe,  from  that  table,  that  the  measure  of  the 
wealth  of  a  nation  is  indicated  by  the  measure  of  its  protection  of  its  in- 
dustry ;  and  that  the  measure  of  the  poverty  of  a  nation  is  marked  by  that 
of  the  degree  in  which  it  neglects  and  abandons  the  care  of  its  own  in- 
dustry, leaving  it  exposed  to  the  action  of  foreign  powers.  Great  Britain 
protects  most  her  industry,  and  the  wealth  of  Great  Britain  is  consequently 
the  greatest.  France  is  next  in  the  degree  of  protection,  and  France  is  next 
in  the  order  of  wealth.  Spain  most  neglects  the  duty  of  protecting  the  in- 
dustry of  her  subject^  and  Spain  is  one  of  the  poorest  of  European  nations. 
Unfortunate  Ireland,  disinherited,  or  rendered  in  her  industry  subservient 
to  Englaud,  is  exactly  in  the  same  state  of  poverty  with  Spain,  measured 
by  the  rule  of  taxation.   And  the  United  States  are  still  poorer  than  either. 

The  views  of  British  prosperity,  which  I  have  endeavored  to  present, 
show  that  her  protecting  policy  is  adapted  alike  to  a  state  of  war  and  of 
peace.  Self-poised,  resting  upon  her  own  internal  resources,  possessing  a 
home  market,  carefully  cherished  and  guarded,  she  is  ever  prepared  for  any 
emerffencv.  We  have  seen  her  coming  out  of  a  wwr  of  incalculable  exer- 
tion,  and  of  great  duration,  with  her  power  unbroken,  her  means  un- 
diminished. We  have  seen  that  almost  every  revolving  year  of  peace  has 
brought  along  with  it  an  increase  of  her  manufactures,  of  her  commerce, 
aud,  consequently,  of  her  navigation.  We  have  seen  that,  constructing  her 
prosperity  upon  the  solid  foundation  of  her  own  protecting  policy,  it  is  un- 
affected by  the  vicissitudes  of  other  States.  What  is  our  own  condition  ? 
Depending  upon  the  state  of  foreign  powers,  confiding  exclusively  in  a 
foreign,  to  the  culpable  neglect  of  a  domestic  policy,  our  interests  are  af- 
fected by  all  their  movements.  Their  wars,  their  misfortunes,  are  the  only 
source  of  our  prosperity.  In  their  peace  and  our  peace  we  behold  our  con- 
dition the  reverse  of  that  of  Great  Britain,  and  all  our  interests  stationary 
or  declining.  Peace  brings  to  us  none  of  the  blessings  of  peace.  Our 
system  is  anomalous  ;  alike  unfitted  to  general  tranquillity,  and  to  a  state 
of  war  or  peace  on  the  part  of  our  own  country.  It  can  succeed  only  in 
the  rare  occurrence  of  a  general  state  of  war  throughout  Europe.  I  am 
no  eulogist  of  England.  I  am  far  from  recommending  her  systems  of 
taxation.  I  have  adverted  to  them  only  as  manifesting  her  extraordinary 
ability.  The  political  and  foreign  interests  of  that  nation  may  have  been, 
as  I  believe  them  to  have  been,  often  badly  managed.  Had  she  abstained 
from  the  wars  into  which  she  has  been  plunged  by  her  ambition,  or  the 
mistaken  policy  of  her  ministers,  the  prosperity  of  England  would,  unques- 
tionably, have  been  much  greater.     But  it  may  happen  that  the  public 


ON   AMERICAN   INDUSTRY.  271 

liberty  and  the  foreign  relations  of  a  nation  have  been  badly  provided  for, 
and  yet  that  its  political  economy  has  been  wisely  managed.  The  alacrity 
or  sullenness  with  which  a  people  pay  taxes  depends  npon  their  wealth  or 
poverty.  If  the  system  of  their  rulers  leads  to  their  impoverishment,  they 
cau  contribute  but  little  to  the  necessities  of  the  State ;  if  to  their  wealth, 
they  cheerfully  and  promptly  pay  the  burdens  imposed  on  them.  Enor- 
mous as  British  taxation  appears  to  be,  iu  comparison  with  that  of  other 
nations,  but  really  lighter,  as  it  in  fact  is,  when  we  consider  its  great 
wealth  and  its  powers  of  production,  that  vast  amount  is  collected  with  the 
most  astonishing  regularity. 

Having  called  the  attention  of  the  committee  to  the  present  adverse 
state  of  our  country,  and  endeavored  to  point  out  the  causes  which  have 
led  to  it;  having  shown  that  similar  causes,  wherever  they  exist  in  other 
countries,  lead  to  the  same  adversity  in  their  condition ;  and  having  shown 
that,  wherever  we  find  opposite  causes  prevailing,  a  high  and  animating 
state  of  national  prosperity  exists,  the  committee  will  agree  with  me  in 
thinking  that  it  is  the  solemn  duty  of  government  to  apply  a  remedy  to 
the  evils  which  afflict  our  country,  if  it  can  apply  one.  Is  there  no 
remedy  within  the  reach  of  the  government  ?  Are  we  doomed  to  behold 
our  industry  languish  and  decay  yet  more  and  more  ?  But  there  is  a 
remedy,  and  that  remedy  consists  in  modifying  our  foreign  policy,  and  in 
adopting  a  genuine  American  System.  We  must  naturalize  the  arts  in 
our  country  ;  and  we  must  naturalize  them  by  the  only  means  which  the 
wisdom  of  nations  has  yet  discovered  to  be  effectual ;  by  adequate  pro- 
tection against  the  otherwise  overwhelming  influence  of  foreigners.  This 
is  only  to  be  accomplished  by  the  establishment  of  a  tariff,  to  the  consid- 
eration of  which  I  am  now  brought. 

And  what  is  this  tariff  2  It  seems  to  have  been  regarded  as  a  sort  of 
monster,  huge  and  deformed — a  wild  beast,  endowed  with  tremendous 
powers  of  destruction,  about  to  be  let  loose  among  our  people,  if  not  to 
devour  them,  at  least  to  consume  their  substance.  But  let  us  calm  our 
passions,  and  deliberately  survey  this  alarming,  this  terrific  being.  The 
sole  object  of  the  tariff:'  is  to  tax  the  produce  of  foreign  industry,  with  the 
view  of  promoting  American  industry.  The  tax  is  exclusively  leveled  at 
foreign  industry.  That  is  the  avowed  and  the  direct  purpose  of  the  tariff. 
If  it  subjects  any  part  of  American  industry  to  burdens,  that  is  an  effect 
not  intended,  but  is  altogether  incidental,  and  perfectly  voluntary. 

It  has  been  treated  as  an  imposition  of  burdens  upon  one  part  of  the 
community  by  design,  for  the  benefit  of  another  ;  as  if,  in  fact,  money  were 
taken  from  the  pockets  of  one  portion  of  the  people  and  put  into  the  pockets 
of  another.  But  is  that  a  fair  representation  of  it  ?  No  man  pays  the 
duty  assessed  on  the  foreign  article  by  compulsion,  but  voluntarily ;  and 
this  voluntary  duty,  if  paid,  goes  into  the  common  exchequer,  for  the  com- 
mon benefit  of  all.  Consumption  has  four  objects  of  choice.  First,  it 
may  abstain  from  the  use  of  the  foreign  article,  and  thus  avoid  the  pay- 


272  SPEECHES    OF    HENKY    CLAY. 

ment  of  the  tax.  Second,  it  may  employ  the  rival  American  fabric. 
Third,  it  may  engage  in  the  business  of  manufacturing,  which  this  bill  is 
designed  to  foster.  Fourth,  or  it  may  supply  itself  from  the  household 
manufactures.  But  it  is  said  by  the  honorable  gentleman  from  Virginia, 
that  the  South,  owing  to  the  character  of  a  certain  portion  of  its  popula- 
tion, can  not  engage  in  the  business  of  manufacturing.  Now  I  do  not 
agree  in  that  opinion  to  the  extent  in  which  it  is  asserted.  The  circum- 
stance alluded  to  may  disqualify  the  South  from  engaging  in  every  branch 
of  manufacture,  as  largely  as  other  quarters  of  the  Union,  but  to  some 
branches  of  it,  that  part  of  our  population  is  well  adapted.  It  indispu- 
tably affords  great  facility  in  the  household  or  domestic  line.  But  if  the 
gentleman's  premises  were  true,  could  his  conclusion  be  admitted  ?  Ac- 
cording to  him,  a  certain  part  of  our  population,  happily  much  the  small- 
est, is  peculiarly  situated.  The  circumstance  of  its  degradation  unfits  it 
for  the  manufacturing  arts.  The  well-being  of  the  other,  and  the  larger 
part  of  our  population,  requires  the  introduction  of  those  arts.  What  is 
to  be  done  in  this  conflict  ?  The  gentleman  would  have  us  abstain  from 
adopting  a  policy  called  for  by  the  interest  of  the  greater  and  freer  part 
of  our  population.  But  is  that  reasonable  ?  Can  it  be  expected  that  the 
interests  of  the  greater  part  should  be  made  to  bend  to  the  condition 
of  the  servile  part  of  our  population  ?  That,  in  effect,  would  be  to 
make  us  the  slaves  of  slaves.  I  went,  with  great  pleasure,  along  with  my 
southern  friends,  and  I  am  ready  again  to  unite  with  them  in  pro- 
testing against  the  exercise  of  any  legislative  power,  on  the  part  of  Con- 
gress, over  that  delicate  subject,  because  it  was  my  solemn  conviction,  that 
Congress  was  interdicted,  or  at  least  not  authorized,  by  the  Constitution, 
to  exercise  any  such  legislative  power.  And  I  am  sure  that  the  patriotism 
of  the  South  may  be  exclusively  relied  upon  to  reject  a  policy  which  should 
be  dictated  by  considerations  altogether  connected  with  that  degraded 
class,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  residue  of  our  population.  But  does  not  a 
perseverance  in  the  foreign  policy,  as  it  now  exists  in  fact,  make  all  parts 
of  the  Union,  not  planting,  tributary  to  the  planting  parts  ?  What  is  the 
argument  ?  It  is  that  we  must  continue  freely  to  receive  the  produce 
of  foreign  industry,  without  regard  to  the  protection  of  American  industry, 
that  a  market  may  be  retained  for  the  sale  abroad  of  the  produce  of  the 
planting  portion  of  the  country ;  and  that,  if  we  lessen  in  all  parts  of 
America — those  which  are  not  planting  as  well  as  the  planting  sections — 
the  consumption  of  foreign  manufactures,  we  diminish  to  that  extent  the 
foreign  market  for  the  planting  produce.  The  existing  state  of  things, 
indeed,  presents  a  sort  of  tacit  compact  between  the  cotton-grower  and  the 
British  manufacturer,  the  stipulations  of  which  are,  on  the  part  of  the  cot- 
ton-grower, that  the  whole  of  the  United  States,  the  otker  portions  as  well 
as  the  cotton-growing,  shall  remain  open  and  unrestricted  in  the  con- 
sumption of  British  manufactures ;  and,  on  the  part  of  the  British  man- 
ufacturer, that  in  consideration  thereof,  he  will  continue  to  purchase  the 


ON   AMERICAN   INDUSTRY.  273 

cotton  of  the  South.  Thus,  then,  we  perceive  that  the  proposed  measure 
instead  of  sacrificing  the  South  to  the  other  parts  of  the  Union,  seeks 
only  to  preserve  them  from  being  absolutely  sacrificed  under  the  operation 
of  the  tacit  compact  which  I  have  described.  Supposing  the  South  to  be 
actually  incompetent,  or  disinclined,  to  embark  at  all  in  the  business  of 
manufacturing,  is  not  its  interest,  nevertheless,  likely  to  be  promoted  by 
creating  a  new  and  an  American  source  of  supply  for  its  consumption  ? 
Now  foreign  powers,  and  Great  Britain  principally,  have  the  monopoly  of 
the  supply  of  southern  consumption.  If  this  bill  should  pass,  an  Amer- 
ican competitor,  in  the  supply  of  the  South,  would  be  raised  up,  and  ulti- 
mately, I  can  not  doubt,  that  it  will  be  supplied  more  cheaply  and  better. 
I  have  before  had  occasion  to  state,  and  will  now  again  mention,  the  bene- 
ficial effects  of  American  competition  with  Europe,  in  furnishing  a  supply 
of  the  article  of  cotton  bagging.  After  the  late  war,  the  influx  of  the 
Scottish  manufacture  prostrated  the  American  establishments.  The  conse- 
quence was,  that  the  Scotch  possessed  the  monopoly  of  the  supply ;  and 
the  price  of  it  rose,  and  attained,  the  year  before  the  last  a  height  which 
amounted  to  more  than  an  equivalent  for  ten  years'  protection  to  the 
American  manufacturer.  This  circumstance  tempted  American  industry 
again  to  engage  in  the  business,  and  several  valuable  manufactories  have 
been  established  in  Kentucky.  They  have  reduced  the  price  of  the  fa- 
bric very  considerably  ;  but,  without  the  protection  of  government,  they 
may  again  be  prostrated,  and  then,  the  Scottish  manufacturer,  engrossing 
the  supply  of  our  consumption,  the  price  will  probably  again  rise.  It  has 
been  tauntingly  asked,  if  Kentucky  can  not  maintain  herself  in  a  compe- 
tition with  the  two  Scottish  towns  of  Inverness  and  Dundee  ?  But  is  that 
a  fair  statement  of  the  case  ?  Those  two  towns  are  cherished  and  sus- 
tained by  the  whole  protecting  policy  of  the  British  empire,  while  Kentucky 
can  not,  and  the  general  government  will  not,  extend  a  like  protection  to 
the  few  Kentucky  villages  in  which  the  article  is  made. 

If  the  cotton-growing  consumption  could  be  constitutionally  exempted 
from  the  operation  of  this  bill,  it  might  be  fair  to  exempt  it,  upon  the  con- 
dition that  foreign  manufactures,  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of  cotton  abroad, 
should  not  enter  at  all  into  the  consumption  of  the  other  parts  of  the 
United  States.  But  such  an  arrangement  as  that,  if  it  could  be  made, 
would  probably  be  objected  to  by  the  cotton-growing  country  itself. 

Second.  The  second  objection  to  the  proposed  bill,  is,  that  it  will  di- 
minish the  amount  of  our  exports.  It  can  have  no  effect  upon  our  exports, 
except  those  which  are  sent  to  Europe.  Except  tobacco  and  rice,  wo  send 
there  nothing  but  the  raw  materials.  The  argument  is,  that  Europe  will 
not  buy  of  us,  if  we  do  not  buy  of  her.  The  first  objection  to  it  is,  that 
it  calls  upon  us  to  look  to  the  question,  and  to  take  care  of  European  abil- 
ity in  legislating  for  American  interests.  Now  if,  in  legislating  for  their 
interests,  they  would  consider  and  provide  for  our  ability,  the  principle  of 
reciprocity  would  enjoin  us  so  to  regulate  our  intercourse  with  them,  as  to 

18 


274  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

leave  their  ability  unimpaired.     But  I  have  shown  that,  in  the  adoption  of 
their  own  policy,  their  inquiry  is  strictly  limited  to   a  consideration  of 
their  peculiar  interests,  without  any  regard  to  that  of  ours.     The  next  re- 
mark I  would  make  is,  that  the  bill  only  operates  upon  certain  articles  of 
European  industry,  which  it  is  supposed  our  interest  requires  us  to  manufac- 
ture  within  ourselves ;  and  although  its  effect  will  be  to  diminish  the 
amount  of  our  imports  of  those  articles,  it  leaves  them  free  to  supply  us 
with  any  other  produce  of  their  industry.     And  since  the  circle  of  human 
comforts,  refinements,  and  luxuries,  is  of  great  extent,  Europe  will  still  find 
herself  able  to  purchase  from  us  what  she  has  hitherto  done,  and  to  dis- 
charge the  debt  in  some  of  those  objects.     If  there  be  any  diminution  in 
our  exports  to  Europe,  it  will  probably  be  in  the  article  of  cotton  to  Great 
Britain.     I  have  stated  that  Britain  buys  cotton  wool  to  the  amount  of 
about  five  millions  sterling,  and  sells  to  foreign  States  to  the  amount  of  up- 
ward of  twenty-one  millions  and  a  half.     Of  this  sum,  we  take  a  little  up- 
ward of  a  million  and  a  half.     The  residue,  of  about  twenty  millions,  she 
must  sell  to  other  foreign  powers  than  to  the  United  States.     Now  their 
market  will  continue  open  to  her,  as  much  after  the  j>assage  of  this  bill,  as 
before.    She  will  therefore  require  from  us  the  raw  material  to  supply  their 
consumption.     But,  it  is  said,  she  may  refuse  to  purchase  from  us,  and  seek 
a  supply  elsewhere.    There  can  be  but  little  doubt  that  she  now  resorts  to  us, 
because  we  can  supply  her  more  cheaply  and  better  than  any  other  country. 
And  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  she  would  cease,  from  any 
pique  toward  us,  to  pursue  her  own  interest.     Suppose  she  was  to  decline 
purchasing  from  us.     The  consequence  would  be,  that  she  would  lose  the 
market  for  the  twenty  millions  sterling,  which  she  now  sells  other  foreign 
powers,  or  enter  it  under  a  disadvantageous  competition  with  us,  or  with 
other  nations,  who  should  obtain  their  supplies  of  the  raw  material  from 
us.     If  there  should  be  any  diminution,  therefore,  in  the  exportation  of 
cotton,  it  would  only  be  in  the  proportion  of  about  one  and  a  half  of 
twenty  ;  that  is,  a  little  upward  of  five  per  centum ;  the  loss  of  a  market 
for  which,  abroad,  would  be  fully  compensated  by  the  market  for  the  article 
created  at  home.     Lastly,  I  would  observe,  that  the  new  application  of  our 
industry,  producing  new  objects  of  exportation,  and  they  possessing  much 
greater  value  than  in  the  raw  state,  we  should  be,  in  the  end,  amply  in- 
demnified by  their  exportation.     Already  the  item  in  our  foreign  exports 
of  manufactures  is  considerable ;  and  we  know  that  our  cotton  fabrics  have 
been  recently  exported  in  a  large  amount  to  South  America,  where  they 
maintain  a  successful  competition  with  those  of  any  other  country. 

Third.  The  third  objection  to  the  tariff  is,  that  it  will  diminish  our 
navigation.  This  great  interest  deserves  every  encouragement,  consistent 
with  the  paramount  interest  of  agriculture.  In  the  order  of  nature  it  is 
secondary  to  both  agriculture  and  manufactures.  Its  business  is  the  trans- 
portation of  the  productions  of  those  two  superior  branches  of  industry. 
It  can  not  therefore  be  expected,  that  tbey  shall  be  molded  or  sacrificed  to 


ON   AMERICAN  INDUSTRY.  275 

suit  its  purposes ;  but  on  the  contrary,  navigation  must  accommodate  itself 
to  the  actual  state  of  agriculture  ami  manufactures.  If,  as  I  believe,  we 
have  nearly  reached  the  maximum  in  value  of  orr  exports  of  raw  produce 
to  Europe,  the  effect  hereafter  will  be,  as  it  respects  that  branch  of  our 
trade,  if  we  persevere  in  the  foreign  system,  to  retain  our  navigation  at  the 
point  which  it  has  now  reached.  By  reducing,  indeed,  as  will  probably 
take  place,  the  price  of  our  raw  materials,  a  further  quantity  of  them  could 
be  exported,  and,  of  course,  additional  employment  might,  in  that  way,  be 
given  to  our  tonnage  ;  but  that  would  be  at  the  expense  of  the  agricultural 
interest.  If  I  am  right  in  supposing  that  no  effect  will  be  produced  by 
this  measure  upon  any  other  branch  of  our  export  trade,  but  that  to  Eu- 
rope ;  that,  with  regard  to  that,  there  will  be  no  sensible  diminution  of  our 
exports  ;  and  that  the  new  direction  given  to  a  portion  of  our  industry  will 
produce  other  objects  of  exportation ;  the  probability  is,  that  our  foreign 
tonnage  will  be  even  increased  under  the  operation  of  this  bill.  But,  if  I 
am  mistaken  in  these  views,  and  it  should  experience  any  reduction,  the  in- 
crease in  our  coasting  tonnage,  resulting  from  the  greater  activity  of  domes- 
tic exchanges,  will  more  than  compensate  the  injury.  Although  our  navi- 
gation partakes  in  the  general  distress  of  the  country,  it  is  less  dejn'essed 
than  any  other  of  our  great  interests.  The  foreign  tonnage  has  been  grad- 
ually, though  slowly,  increasing,  since  1818.  And  our  coasting  tonnage, 
since  1816,  has  increased  upward  of  one  hundred  thousand  tons. 

Fourth.  It  is  next  contended  that  the  effect  of  the  measure  wall  be  to 
diminish  our  foreign  commerce.  The  objection  assumes,  what  I  have  en- 
deavored to  controvert,  that  there  will  be  a  reduction  in  the  value  of  our 
exports.  Commerce  is  an  exchange  of  commodities.  Whatever  will  tend 
to  augment  the  wealth  of  a  nation  must  increase  its  capacity  to  make  these 
exchanges.  By  new  productions,  or  creating  new  values  in  the  fabricated 
forms  which  shall  be  given  to  old  objects  of  our  industry,  we  shall  give  to 
commerce  a  fresh  spring,  a  new  aliment.  The  foreign  commerce  of  the 
country,  from  causes,  some  of  which  I  have  endeavored  to  point  out,  has 
been  extended  as  far  as  it  can  be.  And  I  think  there  can  be  but  little 
doubt  that  the  balance  of  trade  is,  and  for  some  time  past  has  been,  against 
us.  I  was  surprised  to  hear  the  learned  gentleman  from  Massachusetts  (Mr. 
Webster)  rejecting,  as  a  detected  and  exploded  fallacy,  the  idea  of  a  balance 
of  trade.  I  have  not  time  nor  inclination  now  to  discuss  that  topic.  But 
I  will  observe,  that  all  nations  act  upon  the  supposition  of  the  reality  of  its 
existence,  and  seek  to  avoid  a  trade,  the  balance  of  which  is  unfavorable, 
and  to  foster  that  which  presents  a  favorable  balance.  However  the  ac- 
count be  made  up,  whatever  may  be  the  items  of  a  trade,  commodities,  fish- 
ing industry,  marine  labor,  the  carrying  trade,  all  of  which  I  admit  should 
be  comprehended,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  I  think,  that  the  totality  of  the 
exchanges  of  all  descriptons,  made  by  one  nation  with  another,  or  against  the 
totality  of  the  exchanges  of  all  other  nations  together,  may  be  such  as  to 
present  the  state  of  an  unfavorable  balance  with  the  one  or  with  all.     It  is 


276  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

true  that,  in  the  long  run,  the  measures  of  these  exchanges,  that  is,  the  to- 
tality iu  value  of  what  is  given  and  of  what  is  received,  must  be  equal  to 
each  other.  But  great  distress  may  be  felt  long  before  the  counterpoise  can 
be  effected.  In  the  mean  time,  there  will  be  an  export  of  the  precious  met- 
als to  the  deep  injury  of  internal  trade,  an  unfavorable  state  of  exchange,  an 
export  of  public  securities,  a  resort  to  credit,  debt,  mortgages.  Most  of,  if 
not  all,  these  circumstances,  are  believed  now  to  be  indicated  by  our  coun- 
try, in  its  foreign  commercial  relations.  What  have  we  received,  for  exam- 
ple, for  the  public  stocks  sent  to  England  ?  Goods.  But  those  stocks  are 
our  bond,  which  must  be  paid.  Although  the  solidity  of  the  credit  of  the 
English  public  securities  is  not  surpassed  by  that  of  our  own,  strong  as  it 
justly  is,  when  have  we  seen  English  stocks  sold  in  our  market,  and  regu- 
larly quoted  in  the  prices  current,  as  American  stocks  are  in  England  ? 
An  unfavorable  balance  with  one  nation,  may  be  made  up  by  a  favorable 
balance  with  other  nations ;  but  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  that  unfavor- 
able balance  is  strong  presumptive  evidence  against  the  trade.  Commerce 
will  regulate  itself!  Yes,  and  the  extravagance  of  a  spendthrift  heir,  who 
squanders  the  rich  patrimony  which  has  descended  to  him,  will  regulate 
itself  ultimately.  But  it  will  be  a  regulation  which  will  exhibit  him  in  the 
end  safely  confined  within  the  walls  of  a  jail.  Commerce  will  regulate  it- 
self! But  is  it  not  the  duty  of  wise  governments  to  watch  its  course,  and, 
beforehand,  to  provide  against  even  distant  evils,  by  prudent  legislation 
stimulating  the  industry  of  their  own  people,  and  checking  the  policy  of 
foreign  powers  as  it  operates  on  them  ?  The  supply,  then,  of  the  subjects 
of  foreign  commerce,  no  less  than  the  supply  of  consumption  at  home, 
requires  of  us  to  give   a  jDortion  of  our  labor  such  a  direction   as   will 

enable  us  to  produce  them.     That  is  the  object  of  the  measure  under 

consideration,  and  I  can  not  doubt  that,  if  adopted,  it  will  accomplish  its 
object. 

Fifth.  The  fifth  objection  to  the  tariff  is,  that  it  will  diminish  the  pub- 
lic revenue,  disable  us  from  paying  the  public  debt,  and  finally  compel  a 
resort  to  a  system  of  excise  and  internal  taxation.  This  objection  is  found- 
ed upon  the  supposition  that  the  reduction  in  the  importation  of  the  sub- 
jects, on  which  the  increased  duties  are  to  operate,  will  be  such  as  to  pro- 
duce the  alleged  effect.  All  this  is  matter  of  mere  conjecture,  and  can  only 
be  determined  by  experiment.  I  have  very  little  doubt,  with  my  colleague 
(Mr.  Trimble),  that  the  revenue  will  be  increased  considerably,  for  some 
years  at  least,  under  the  operation  of  this  bill.  The  diminution  in  the 
quantity  imported  will  be  compensated  by  the  augmentation  of  the  duty. 
In  reference  to  the  article  of  molasses,  for  example,  if  the  import  of  it 
should  be  reduced  fifty  per  centum,  the  amount  of  duty  collected  would  be 
the  same  as  it  now  is.  But  it  will  not,  in  all  probability,  be  reduced  by 
any  thing  like  that  proportion.  And  then  there  are  some  other  articles 
which  will  continue  to  be  introduced  in  as  large  quantities  as  ever,  notwith- 
standing the  increase  of  duty,  the  object  in  reference  to  them  being  reve- 


ON   AMERICAN   INDUSTRY.  277 

nue,  and  not  the  encouragement  of  domestic  manufactures.     Another  cause 
will  render  the  revenue  of  this  year,  in  particular,  much  more  productive 
than  it  otherwise  would  have  been;  and  that  is,  that  large  quantities  of 
goods  have  been  introduced  into  the  country,  in  anticipation  of  the  adop- 
tion of  this  measure.     The  eagle  does  not  dart  a  keener  gaze  upon  his  in- 
tended prey,  than  that  with  which  the  British  manufacturer  and  merchant 
watches  the  foreign  market,  and  the  course  even  of  our  elections  as  well  as 
our  legislation.     The  passage  of  this  bill  has  been  expected  ;  and  all  our 
information  is  that  the  importations,  during  this  spring  have  been  immense. 
But,  further,  the  measure  of  our  importations  is  that  of  our  exportations, 
If  I  am  right  in  supposing  that,  in  future,  the  amount  of  these,  in  the  old 
or  new  forms  of  the  produce  of  our  labor,  will  not  be  diminished,  but  prob- 
ably increased,  then  the  amount  of  our  importations,  and  consequently  of 
our  revenue,  will  not  be  reduced,  but  may  be  extended.     If  these  ideas  be 
correct,  there  will  be  no  inability  on  the  part  of  government  to  extinguish 
the  public  debt.  uThe  payment  of  that  debt,  and  the  consequent  liberation 
of  the  public  resources  from  the  charge  of  it,  is  extremely  desirable.     No 
one  is  more  anxious  than  I  am  to  see  that  important  object  accomplished. 
But  I  entirely  concur  with  the  gentleman  from  Virginia   (Mr.  Barbour)  in 
thinking  that  no  material  sacrifice  of  any  of  the  great  interests  of  the  na- 
tion ought  to  be  made  to  effectuate  it.     Such  is  the  elastic  and  accumulat- 
ing nature  of  our  public  resources,  from  the  silent  augmentation   of  our 
population,  that  if,  in  any  given  state  of  the  public  revenue,  we  throw  our- 
selves upon  a  couch  and  go  to   sleep,  we  may,  after  a  short  time,  awake 
with  an  ability  abundantly  increased  to  redeem  any  reasonable  amount  of 
public  debt  with  which  we  may  happen  to  be  burdened.     The  public  debt 
of  the  United  States,  though  nominally  larger  now  than  it  was  in  the  year 
1791,  bears  really  no  sort  of  discouraging  comparison  to  its  amount  at  that 
time,  whatever  standard  we  may  choose  to  adopt  to  institute  the  compari- 
son.    It  was  in    1791   about  seventy-five  millions  of  dollars.     It  is  now 
about  ninety.     Then  we  had  a  population  of  about  four  millions.     Now 
we  have  upward  of  ten  millions.     Then  we  had  a  revenue  short  of  five 
millions  of  dollars.     Now  our  revenue  exceeds  twenty.     If  we  select  pop- 
ulation as  the  standard,  our  present  population  is  one  hundred  and  fifty 
per  centum   greater  than  it  was  in    1791;  if  revenue   ihat  is  four  times 
more  now  than  at  the  former  period  ;  while  the  publi    .lebt  has  increased 
only  in  a  ratio  of  twenty  per  centum.     A  public  debt  of  three  hundred 
millions  of  dollars,  at  the  present  day,  considering  our  actual  ability,  com- 
pounded both  of  the  increase  of  population  and  of  revenue,  would  not  be 
more  onerous  now  than  the  debt  of  seventy-five  millions  of  dollars  was,  at 
the  epoch  of  1791,  in  reference  to  the  same  circumstances.     -If  I  am  riffht 

,  & 

in  supposing  that,  under  the  operation  of  the  proposed  measure,  there  will 
not  be  any  diminution,  but  a  probable  increase  of  the  public  revenue,  there 
will  be  no  difficulty  in  defraying  the  current  expenses  of  government,  and 
paying  the  principal  as  well  as  the  interest  of  the  public  debt,  as  it  becomes 


sj 


278  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

due.     Let  us,  for  a  moment,  hoAvever,  indulge  the  improbable  supposition 
of  the  opponents  of  the  tariff,  that  there  will  be  a  reduction  of  the  reve- 
nue to  the  extent  of  the  most  extravagant  calculation  which  has  been  made, 
that  is  to  say,   to  the  extent  of  five  millions.     That  sum  deducted,  we 
shall  still  have  remaining  a  revenue  of  about  fifteen  millions.     The  treas- 
ury estimates  of  the  current  services  of  the  years  1822,  1823,  and  1824, 
exceed,  each    year,  nine  millions.     The  lapse    of  revolutionary   pensions, 
and  judicious  retrenchments  which  might  be  made,  without  detriment  to 
any  of  the  essential  establishments  of  the  country,  would  probably  reduce 
them  below  nine  millions.     Let  us  assume  that  sum,  to  which  add  about 
five  millions  and  a  half  for  the  interest  of  the  public  debt,  and  the  wants 
of  government  would  require  a  revenue  of  fourteen  and  a  half  millions, 
leaving  a  surplus  of  revenue  of  half  a  million  beyond  the  public  expendi- 
ture.    Thus,  by  a  postponement  of  the   payment  of  the  principal  of  the 
public  debt,  in  which  the  public  creditors  would  gladly  acquiesce,  and  con- 
fiding, for  the  means  of  redeeming  it,  in  the  necessary  increase  of  our  rev- 
enue from  the  natural  augmentation  of  our  population  and  consumption, 
we  may  safely  adopt  the  proposed  measure,  even  if  it  should  be  attended 
(which  is  confidently  denied)   with  the   supposed  diminution  of  revenue. 
We  shall  not,  then,  have  occasion  to  vary  the  existing  system  of  taxation ; 
we  shall  be  under  no  necessity  to  resort  either  to  direct  taxes  or  to  an  ex- 
cise.    But,  suppose  the  alternative  were  really  forced  upon  us  of  continuing 
the  foreign  system,  with  its  inevitable  impoverishment  of  the  country,  but 
with  the  advantage  of  the   present  mode   of  collecting  the  taxes,  or  of 
adopting  the  American  system,  with  its  increase  of  the  national  wealth, 
but  with  the  disadvantage  of  an  excise,  could  any  one  hesitate   between 
them  ?     Customs  and  an  excise  agree  in  the  essential  particulars,  that  they 
are  both  taxes  upon  consumption,  and  both  are  voluntary.     They  differ 
only  in  the  mode  of  collection.     The  office  for  the  collection  of  one  is  lo- 
cated on  the  frontier,  and  that  for  the  other  within  the  interior.     I  believe 
it  was  Mr.  Jefferson,  who  in  reply  to  the  boast  of  a  citizen  of  New  York  of 
the  amount  of  the  public  revenue  paid  by  that  city,  asked  who  would  pay 
it,  if  the  collector's  office  were  removed  to  Paulus  Hook,  on  the  New  Jer- 
sey shore?     National  wealth  is  the  source  of  all  taxation.     And,  my  word 
for  it,  the  people  are  too  intelligent  to  be  deceived  by  mere  names,  and  not 
to  give  a  decided  preference  to  that  system  which  is  based  upon  their 
wealth  and  prosperity,  rather  than   to  that  which  is  founded  upon  their 
impoverishment  and  ruin. 

Sixth.  But,  according  to  the  opponents  of  the  domestic  policy,  the  pro- 
posed system  will  force  capital  and  labor  into  new  and  reluctant  employ- 
ments ;  we  are  not  prepared,  in  consequence  of  the  high  price  of  wages, 
for  the  successful  establishment  of  manufactures,  and  we  must  fail  in  the 
experiment.  We  have  seen  that  the  existing  occupations  of  our  society, 
those  of  agriculture,  commerce,  navigation,  and  the  learned  professions,  are 
overflowing  with  competitors,  and  that  the  want  of  employment  is  severely 


ON    AMERICAN   INDUSTRY.  279 

felt.     Now  what  does  this  bill  propose  ?     To  open  a  new  and  extensive 
field  of  business,  in  which  all  that  choose  may  enter.     There  is  no  com- 
pulsion upon  any  one  to  engage  in  it.     An  option  only  is  given  to  indus- 
try, to  continue  in  the  present  unprofitable  pursuits,  or  to  embark  in  a  new 
and  promising  one.     The  effect  will  be,  to  lessen  the  competition  in  the 
old  branches  of  business,  and  to  multiply  our  resources  for  increasing  our 
comforts,  and  augmenting  the  national  wealth.     The  alleged  fact   of  the 
high  price  of  wages  is  not  admitted.     The  truth  is,  that  no  class  of  society 
suffers  more,  in  the  present  stagnation  of  business,  than  the  laboring  class. 
That  is  a  necessary  effect  of  the  depression  of  agriculture,  the  principal 
business  of  the  community.     The  wages  of  able-bodied  men  vary  from 
five  to  eight  dollars  per  month,  and  such  has  been  the  want  of  employment,  \/ 
in  some  parts  of  the  Union,  that  instances   have   not  been  unfrequent,  of 
men  working  merely  for  the  means  of  present  subsistence.     If  the  wages 
for  labor  here  and  in  England  are  compared,  they  will  be  found  not  to  be 
essentially  different.     I  agree  with  the  honorable  gentleman  from  Virginia 
that  high  wages  are  a  proof  of  national  prosperity  ;  we  differ  only  in  the 
means  by  which  that  desirable  end  shall  be  attained.     But,  if  the  fact 
were  true,  that  the  wages  of  labor  are  high,  I  deny  the  correctness  of  the 
argument  founded  upon  it.     The  argument  assumes,  that  natural  labor  is 
the  principal  element  in  the  business  of  manufacture.     That  was  the  an- 
cient  theory.     But  the   valuable  inventions    and  vast  improvements    in 
machinery  which  have  been  made  within  a  iew  past  years,  have  produced 
a  new  era  in  the  arts.     The  effect  of  this  change,  in  the  powers  of  produc- 
tion, may  be  estimated,  from  what   I  have   already  stated  in  relation  to 
England,  and  to  the  triumphs  of  European  artificial  labor  over  the  natural 
labor  of  Asia.     In  considering  the  fitness  of  a  nation  for  the  establish- 
ment of  manufactures,  we  must  no  longer  limit  our  views  to  the  state  of 
its  population,  and  the  price  of  wages.     All  circumstances  must  be  re- 
garded, of  which  that  is,  perhaps,  the  least  important.     Capital,  ingenuity     i> 
iu  the  construction,  and  adroitness  in  the  use  of  machinery,  and  the  pos- 
session of  the  raw  materials,  are  those  which  deserve  the  greatest  consider- 
ation.    All  these  circumstances  (except  that  of  capital,  of  which  there  is 
no  deficiency)  exist  in  our  country  in  an  eminent  degree,  and  more  than 
counterbalance   the  disadvantage,  if  it  really  existed,  of  the  lower  wao-es 
of  labor  in  Great  Britain.     The  dependence  upon  foreign  nations  for  the 
raw  material  of  any  great  manufacture,  has  been  considered  as  a  discourag- 
ing fact.     The  state  of  our  population  is  peculiarly  favorable   to  the  most 
extensive  introduction  of  machinery.     "We  have  no  prejudices  to  combat, 
no  persons  to  drive  out  of  employment.     The  pamphlet,  to  which  we  have 
had  occasion  so  often   to  refer,  in  enumerating  the   causes  which  have 
brought  in  England  their  maunfactures  to  such  a  state  of  perfection,  and 
which  now  enable  them,  in  the  opinion  of  the  writer,  to  defy  all  competi- 
tion, does  not  specify,  as  one  of  them,  low  wages.     It  assigns  three  :  first, 
capital;  secondly,  extent  and  costliness  of  machinery;  and,  thirdlv,  steady 


280  SPEECHES   OF    HENKY    CLAY. 

and  persevering  industry.  Notwithstanding  the  concurrence  of  so  many 
iavorable  causes,  in  our  country,  for  the  introduction  of  the  aits,  we  are 
earnestly  dissuaded  from  making  the  experiment,  and  our  ultimate  failure 
is  confidently  predicted.  Why  should  we  fail  ?  Nations,  like  men,  fail  in 
nothing  which  they  boldly  attempt,  when  sustained  by  virtuous  purpose 
and  firm  resolution.  I  am  not  willing  to  admit  this  depreciation  of  Amer- 
ican skill  and  enterprise.  I  am  not  willing  to  strike  before  an  effort  is 
made.  All  our  past  history  exhorts  us  to  proceed,  and  inspires  us  with 
animating  hopes  of  success.  Past  predictions  of  our  incapacity  have  failed, 
and  present  predictions  will  not  be  realized.  At  the  commencement  of 
this  government,  we  were  told  that  the  attempt  would  be  idle  to  construct 
a  marine  adequate  to  the  commerce  of  the  country,  or  even  to  the  business 
of  its  coasting  trade.  The  founders  of  our  government  did  not  listen  to 
these  discouraging  counsels;  and,  behold  the  fruits  of  their  just  compre- 
hension of  our  resources  !  Our  restrictive  policy  was  denounced,  and  it 
was  foretold  that  it  would  utterly  disappoint  all  our  expectations.  But  our 
restrictive  policy  has  been  eminently  successful ;  and  the  share  which  our 
navigation  now  enjoys  in  the  trade  with  France,  and  with  the  British  West 
India  Islands,  attests  its  victory.  What  were  not  the  disheartening  pre- 
dictions of  the  opponents  of  the  late  war  ?  Defeat,  discomfort,  and  dis- 
grace, were  to  be  the  certain,  but  not  the  worst  effect  of  it.  Here,  again, 
did  prophecy  prove  false  ;  and  the  energies  of  our  country,  and  the  valor 
and  the  patriotism  of  our  people,  carried  us  gloriously  through  the  war. 
We  are  now,  and  ever  will  be,  essentially  an  agricultural  people.  Without 
a  material  change  in  the  fixed  habits  of  the  country,  the  friends  of  this 
measure  desire  to  draw  to  it,  as  a  powerful  auxiliary  to  its  industry,  the 
manufacturing  arts.  The  difference  between  a  nation  with  and  without  the 
arts,  may  be  conceived  by  the  difference  between  a  keel-boat  and  a  steam- 
boat, combating  the  rapid  torrent  of  the  Mississippi.  How  slow  does  the 
former  ascend,  hugging  the  sinuosities  of  the  shore,  pushed  on  by  her  hardy 
and  exposed  ciew,  now  throwing  themselves  in  vigorous  concert  on  their 
oars,  and  then  seizing  the  peudent  boughs  of  overhanging  trees  :  she  seems 
hardly  to  move  ;  and  her  scanty  cargo  is  scarcely  worth  the  transportation  ! 
With  what  ease  is  she  not  passed  by  the  steamboat,  laden  with  the  riches 
of  all  quarters  of  the  world,  with  a  crew  of  gay,  cheerful,  and  protected 
passengers,  now  dashing  into  the  midst  of  the  current,  or  gliding  through 
the  eddies  near  the  shore  !  Nature  herself  seems  to  survey,  with  astonish- 
ment, the  passing  wonder,  and,  in  silent  submission,  reluctantly  to  own  the 
magnificent  triumphs,  in  her  own  vast  dominion,  of  Ftd ton's  immortal  genius. 
Seventh.  But  it  is  said  that,  wherever  there  is  a  concurrence  of  favor- 
able circumstances,  manufactures  will  arise  of  themselves,  without  pro- 
tection ;  and  that  we  should  not  disturb  the  natural  progress  of  industry, 
hut  leave  things  to  themselves.  If  all  nations  would  modify  their  policy 
on  this  axiom,  perhaps  it  would  be  better  for  the  common  good  of  the 
whole.      Even  then,  in  consequence  of  natural  advantages  and  a  greater 


ON   AMERICAN    INDUSTRY.  281 

advance  in  civilization  and  in  the  arts,  some  nations  would  enjoy  a  state  of 
much  higher  prosperity  than  others.     But  there  is  no  universal  Legislation. 
The  globe  is  divided   into  different  communities,  each  seeking-  to  appro- 
priate to  itself  all  the  advantages  it  can,  without  reference  to  the  prosperity 
of  others.     Whether  this  is  right  or  not,  it  has  always  been,  and  ever  will 
be  the  case.     Perhaps  the  care  of  the  interests  of  one  people  is  sufficient 
for  all  the  wisdom  of  one  legislature  ;  and   that  it  is  among  nations  as 
among  individuals,  that  the  happiness  of  the  whole  is  best  secured  by  each 
attending  to  its  own  peculiar  interests.     The  proposition  to  be  maintained 
by  our  adversaries  is,  that  manufactures,  without  protection,  Avill  in  due 
time  spring  up  in  our  country,  and  sustain  themselves,  in  a  competition 
with  foreign  fabrics,  however  advanced  the  arts,  and  whatever  the  degree 
of  protection  may  be  in  foreign  countries.     Now  I  contend,  that  this  prop- 
osition is  refuted  by  all   experience,  ancient  and  modern,  and  in  every 
country.     If  I  am  ashed,  why  unprotected  industry  should  not  succeed  in 
a  struggle  with  protected  industry,  I  answer,  the  fact  has  ever  been  so,  V 
and  that  is  sufficient ;  I  reply,  that  uniform  experience  evinces  that  it 
can  not  succeed  in  such  an  unequal  contest,  and  that  is  sufficient.      If  we 
speculate  on  the  causes  of  this  universal  truth,  we  may  differ  about  them. 
Still  the  indisputable  fact  remains.     And  we  should  be  as  unwise  in  not 
availing:  ourselves  of  the  guide  which  it  furnishes,  as  a  man  would  be,  who 
should  refuse  to  bask  in  the  rays  of  the  sun,  because  he  could  not  agree 
with  Judo-e  Woodward  as  to  the  nature  of  the  substance  of  that  planet, 
to  which  we  are  indebted  for  heat  and  light.     If  I  were  to  attempt  to  par- 
ticularize the  causes  which  prevent  the  success  of  the  manufacturing  arts, 
without  protection,  I  should  say  that  they  are,  first,  the  obduracy  of  fixed  \- 
habits.     No  nation,  no  individual,  will  easily  change  an  established  course 
of  business,  even  if   it  be  unprofitable  ;  and  least  of  all  is  an  agricultural 
people  prone  to  innovation.     With  what  reluctance  do  they  adopt  im- 
provements in  the  instruments  of  husbandry,  or  in  modes  of  cultivation  ! 
If  the  farmer  makes  a  good  crop,  and  sells  it  badly ;  or  makes  a  short 
crop  ;  buoyed  up  by  hope  he  perseveres,  and  trusts  that  a  favorable  change 
of  the  market,  or  of  the  seasons,  will  enable  him,  in  the  succeeding  year, 
to  repair  the  misfortunes  of  the  past.      Secondly,  the  uncertainty,  fluctua-t 
tion,  and  unsteadiness,  of  the  home  market,  when  liable  to  an  unrestricted 
influx  of  fabrics  from  all  foreign  nations ;  and,  thirdly,  the  superior  advance 
of  skill,  and  amount  of  capital,  which  foreign  nations  have  obtained,  by  the 
protection  of  their  own  industry.     From  the  latter  or  from  other  causes, 
the  unprotected   manufactures  of  a  country  are  exposed  to  the  danger 
of  being  crushed  in  their  infancy,  either  by  the  design  or  from  the  neces- 
sities of  foreign  manufacturers.     Gentlemen  are  incredulous  as  to  the  at- 
tempts  of  foreign   manufacturers  to  accomplish   the  destruction  of  ours. 
Why  should  they  not  make  such  attempts  ?     If  the  Scottish  manufacturer, 
by  surcharging  our  market,  in  one  'year,  with  the  article   of  cotton  bag- 
ging, for  example,  should  so  reduce  the  price  as  to  discourage  and  put 


282  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

down  the  home  manufacture,  he  would  secure  to  himself  the  monopoly 
of  the  supply.  And  now,  having  the  exclusive  possession  of  the  market, 
perhaps  for  a  long  term  of  years,  he  might  be  more  than  indemnified  for 
his  first  loss,  in  the  subsequent  rise  in  the  price  of  the  article.  What 
have  we  not  seen  under  our  own  eyes  ?  The  competition  for  the  trans- 
jportation  of  the  mail,  between  this  place  and  Baltimore,  so  excited,  that  to 
obtain  it  an  individual  offered,  at  great  loss,  to  carry  it  a  whole  year  for 
one  dollar  !  His  calculation  no  doubt,  was,  that  by  driving  his  competitor 
off  the  road,  and  securing  to  himself  the  carriage  of  the  mail,  he  would 
be  afterward  able  to  repair  his  original  loss  by  new  contracts  with  the  de- 
partment. But  the  necessities  of  foreign  manufacturers,  without  imputing 
to  them  any  sinister  design,  may  oblige  them  to  throw  into  our  markets 
the  fabrics  which  have  accumulated  on  their  hands,  in  consequence  of  ob- 
struction in  the  ordinary  vents,  or  from  over-calculation  ;  and  the  forced 
sales,  at  losing  prices,  may  prostrate  our  establishments.  From  this  view 
of  the  subject,  it  follows,  that,  if  we  would  place  the  industry  of  our  coun- 
try upon  a  solid  and  unshakable  foundation,  we  must  adopt  the  protecting 
policy,  which  has  everywhere  succeeded,  and  reject  that  which  would 
abandon  it,  which  has  everywhere  failed. 

Eighth.  But  if  the  policy  of  protection  be  wise,  the  gentleman  from 
Virginia  (Mr.  Barbour)  has  made  some  ingenious  calculations  to  prove  that 
the  measure  of  protection,  already  extended,  has  been  sufficiently  great. 
With  some  few  exceptions,  the  existing  duties,  of  which  he  has  made  an 
estimate,  were  laid  with  the  object  of  revenue,  and  without  reference  to 
that  of  encouragement  to  domestic  industry;  and  although  it  is  admitted 
that  the  incidental  effect  of  duties,  so  laid,  is  to  promote  our  manufactures, 
yet  if  it  falls  short  of  competent  protection,  the  duties  might  as  well  not 
have  been  imposed,  with  reference  to  that  purpose.  A  moderate  addition 
may  acomplish  this  desirable  end ;  and  the  proposed  tariff  is  believed  to 
have  this  character. 

Ninth.  The  prohibitory  policy,  it  is  confidently  asserted,  is  condemned 
by  the  wisdom  of  Europe,  and  by  her  most  enlightened  statesmen.  Is  this 
the  fact  ?  We  call  upon  gentlemen  to  show  in  what  instance  a  nation  that 
has  enjoyed  its  benefits  has  surrendered  it.  [Here  Mr.  Barbour  rose, 
Mr.  Clay  giving  way,  and  said,  that  England  had  departed  from  it  in  the 
China  trade,  in  allowing  us  to  trade  with  her  East  India  possessions,  and 
in  tolerating  our  navigation  to  her  West  India  colonies.]  With  respect  to 
the  trade  to  China,  the  whole  amount  of  what  England  has  done,  is,  to 
modify  the  monopoly  of  the  East  India  Company,  in  behalf  of  one, 
and  a  small  part  of  her  subjects,  to  increase  the  commerce  of  another 
and  the  greater  portion  of  them.  The  abolition  of  the  restriction,  there- 
fore, operates  altogether  among  the  subjects  of  England ;  and  does  not 
touch  at  all  the  interests  of  foreign  powers.  The  toleration  of  our  com- 
merce to  British  India,  is  for  the  sake  of  the  specie,  with  which  we 
mainly  cany  on  that  commerce,  and  which,  having  performed  its  circuit, 


ON    AMERICAN    INDUSTRY.  283 

returns  to  Great  Britain  in  exchange  for  British  manufactures.  The  relax- 
ation from  the  colonial  policy,  in  the  instance  of  our  trade  and  navigation 
with  the  West  Indies,  is  a  most  unfortunate  example  for  the  honorahle 
gentleman  ;  for  in  it  is  an  illustrious  proof  of  the  success  of  our  restrictive 
policy,  when  resolutely  adhered  to.  Great  Britain  had  prescribed  the 
terms  on  which  we  were  to  be  graciously  allowed  to  carry  on  that  trade. 
The  effect  of  her  regulations  was,  to  exclude  our  navigation  altogether, 
and  a  complete  monopoly,  on  the  part  of  the  British  navigation,  was  se- 
cured. We  forbade  it,  unless  our  vessels  should  be  allowed  a  perfect 
reciprocity.  Great  Britain  stood  out  a  long  time,  but  finally  yielded,  and 
our  navigation  nosv  fairly  shares  with  hers  in  the  trade.  Have  gentlemen 
no  other  to  exhibit  than  these  trivial  relaxations  from  the  prohibitory  policy, 
which  do  not  amount  to  a  drop  iu  the  bucket,  to  prove  its  abandonment 
by  Great  Britain  ?  Let  them  show  us  that  her  laws  are  repealed  which 
prohibit  the  introduction  of  our  flour  and  provisions ;  of  French  silks,  laces, 
porcelain,  manufactures  of  bronze,  mirrors,  woolens;  and  of  the  manu- 
factures of  all  other  natious ;  and  then,  we  may  be  ready  to  allow  that 
Great  Britain  has  really  abolished  her  prohibitory  policy.  We  find  there, 
on  the  contrary,  that  system  of  policy  in  full  and  rigorous  operation,  and 
a  most  curiously  interwoven  system  it  is,  as  she  enforces  it.  She  begins 
by  protecting  all  parts  of  her  immense  dominions  against  foreign  nations. 
She  then  protects  the  parent  country  against  the  colonies ;  and,  finally, 
one  part  of  the  parent  country  against  another.  The  sagacity  of  Scotch 
industry  has  carried  the  process  of  distillation  to  a  perfection  which  would 
place  the  art  in  England  on  a  fooling  of  disadvantageous  competition,  and 
English  distillation  has  been  protected  accordingly.  But  suppose  it  were 
even  true  that  Great  Britain  had  abolished  all  restrictions  upon  trade,  and 
allowed  the  freest  introduction  of  the  produce  of  foreign  labor,  would  that 
prove  it  unwise  for  us  to  adopt  the  protecting  system  ?  The  object  of  pro- 
tection is  the  establishment  and  perfection  of  the  arts.  In  England  it  has 
accomplished  its  purpose,  fulfilled  its  end.  If  she  has  not  carried  every 
branch  of  manufacture  to  the  same  high  state  of  perfection  that  any  other 
nation  has,  she  has  succeeded  in  so  many,  that  she  may  safely  challenge 
the  most  unshackled  competition  in  exchanges.  It  is  upon  this  very  ground  x 
that  many  of  her  writers  recommend  an  abandonment  of  the  prohibitory 
system.  It  is  to  give  greater  scope  to  British  industry  and  enterprise.  It 
is  upon  the  same  selfish  principle.  The  object  of  the  most  perfect  freedom 
of  trade,  with  such  a  nation  as  Britain,  and  of  the  most  rigorous  system 
of  prohibition,  with  a  nation  whose  arts  are  in  their  infancy,  may  both  be 
precisely  the  same.  In  both  cases,  it  is  to  give  greater  expansion  to  native 
industry.  They  only  differ  in  the  theaters  of  their  operation.  The  aboli- 
tion of  the  restrictive  system  by  Britain,  if  by  it  she  could  prevail  upon 
other  nations  to  imitate  her  example,  would  have  the  effect  of  extending 
the  consumption  of  British  produce  in  other  countries,  where  her  writers 
boldly  affirm  it  could  maintain  a  fearless  competition  with  the  produce  of 


284  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

native  labor.     The  adoption  of  the  restrictive  system,  on  the  part  of  the 
United  States,  by  excluding  the  produce  of  foreign  labor,  would  extend  the 
consumption  of  American  produce,  unable,  in  the  infancy  and  unprotected 
state  of  the  arts,  to  sustain  a  competition  with  foreign  fabrics.     Let  our 
arts  breathe  under  the  shade  of  protection  ;  let  them  be  perfected,  as  they 
are  in  England,  and  we  shall  then  be  ready,  as  England  now  is  said  to  be, 
to  put  aside  protection,  and  to  enter  upon  the  freest  exchanges.     To  what 
other  cause,  than  to  their  whole  prohibitory  policy,  can  you  ascribe  British 
prosperity  ?     It  will  not  do  to  assign  it  to  that  of  her  antiquity  ;  for  France 
is  no  less  ancient ;  though  much  less  rich  and  powerful,  in  proportion  to 
the  population  and  natural  advantages  of  France.     Ilallam,  a  sensible  and 
highly  approved  writer  on  the  middle  ages,  assigns  the  revival  of  the  pros- 
perity of  the  north  of  Europe  to  the  success  of  the  woolen  manufactories 
of  Flanders,  and  the  commerce  of  which  their  fabrics  became  the  subject; 
and  the  commencement  of  that  of  England  to  the  establishment  of  similar 
manufactures  there  under  the  Edwards,  aud  to  the  prohibitions  which  began 
about  the  same  time.     As  to  the  poor-rates,  the  theme  of  so  much  reproach 
without  England,  and  of  so  much  regret  within  it,  among  her  speculative 
writers,  the  system  was  a  strong  proof,  no  less  of  her  unbounded  wealth 
than  of  her  pauperism.     What  other  nation  can  dispense,  in  the  form 
of  regulated    charity,    the    enormous   sum,  I   believe,   of  ten  or   twelve 
millions  sterling  ?      The   number  of  British   paupers  was  the  result  of 
pressing  the  principle  of  population  to  its  utmost  limits,  by  her  protect- 
ing policy,  in  the  creation  of  wealth,  and  in  placing  the  rest  of  the  world 
under    tribute    to    her    industry.      Doubtless   the    condition    of   England 
would   be  better,  without  paupers,  if  in  other  respects  it  remained  the 
same.     But  in  her  actual  circumstances,  the  poor  system  has  the  salutary 
effect  of  an  equalizing  corrective  of  the  tendency  to  the  concentration  of 
riches,  produced  by  the  genius  of  her  political  institutions  and  by  her  pro- 
hibitory system. 

But  is  it  true,  that  England  is  convinced  of  the  impolicy  of  the  prohib- 
itory system,  and  desirous  to  abandon  it  ?  What  proof  have  we  to  that 
effect  ?  We  are  asked  to  reject  the  evidence  deducible  from  the  settled 
and  steady  practice  of  England,  aud  to  take  lessons  in  a  school  of  philo- 
sophical writers,  whose  visionary  theories  are  nowhere  adopted  ;  or,  if 
adopted,  bring  with  them  inevitable  distress,  impoverishment,  and  ruin. 
Let  us  hear  the  testimony  of  an  illustrious  personage,  entitled  to  the 
greatest  attention,  because  he  speaks  after  the  full  experiment  of  the  un- 
restrictive  system  made  in  his  own  empire.  I  hope  I  shall  give  no  offense 
in  quoting  from  a  publication  issued  from  "the  mint  of  Philadelphia ;" 
from  a  work  of  Mr.  Carey,  of  whom  I  seize,  with  great  pleasure,  the  oc- 
casion to  say,  that  he  merits  the  public  gratitude,  for  the  disinterested  dili- 
gence with  which  he  has  collected  a  large  mass  of  highly  useful  facts,  and 
for  the  clear  and  convincing  reasoning  with  which  he  generally  illustrates 


ON    AMERICAN    INDUSTRY.  285 

them.     The  Emperor  of  Russia,  iu  March,  1822,  after  about  two  years' 
trial  of  the  free  system,  says,  through  Couut  Nesselrode : 

"  To  produce  happy  effects,  the  principles  of  commercial  freedom  must  be 
generally  adopted.  The  state  which  adopts,  while  others  reject  them,  must 
condemn  its  own  industry  and  commerce  to  pay  a  ruinous  tribute  to  those  of 
other  countries. 

"From  a  circulation  exempt  from  restraint,  and  the  facility  afforded  by  recip- 
rocal exchanges,  almost  all  the  governments  at  first  resolved  to  seek  the  means 
of  repairing  the  evil  which  Europe  had  been  doomed  to  suffer ;  but  experience, 
and  more  correct  calculations,  because  they  were  made  from  certain  data,  and 
upon  the  results  already  known  of  the  peace  that  had  just  taken  place,  forced 
them  soon  to  adhere  to  the  prohibitory  system. 

"  England  preserved  hers.  Austria  remained  faithful  to  the  rule  she  had  laid 
down,  to  guard  herself  against  the  rivalship  of  foreign  industry.  France,  with 
the  same  views,  adopted  the  most  rigorous  measures  of  precaution.  And  Prus- 
sia published  a  new  tariff  in  October  last,  which  proves  that  she  found  it  im- 
possible not  to  follow  the  example  of  the  rest  of  Europe. 

"  In  proportion  as  the  prohibitory  system  is  extended  and  rendered  perfect 
in  other  countries,  that  state  which  pursues  the  contrary  system,  makes,  from 
day  to  day,  sacrifices  more  extensive  and  more  considerable.  *  *  *  It 
offers  a  continual  encouragement  to  the  manufactures  of  other  countries,  and 
its  own  manufactures  perish  in  the  struggle  which  they  are,  as  yet,  unable  to 
maintain. 

"  It  is  with  the  most  lively  feelings  ef  regret  we  acknowledge  it  is  our  own 
proper  experience  which  enables  us  to  trace  this  picture.  The  evils  which  it 
details  have  been  realized  in  Russia  and  Poland,  since  the  conclusion  of  the  act 
of  the  7th  and  19th  of  December,  1818.  Agriculture  without  a  market,  indus- 
try without  protection,  languish  and  decline.  Specie  is  exported,  and  the  most  solid 
commercial  houses  are  shaken.  The  public  prosperity  would  soon  feel  the  wound 
inflicted  on  private  fortunes,  if  new  regulations  did  not  promptly  change  the 
actual  state  of  affairs. 

"  Events  have  proved,  that  our  agriculture  and  our  commerce,  as  well  as  our 
manufacturing  industry,  are  not  only  paralyzed,  but  brought  to  the  brink  of 
ruin." 

The  example  of  Spain  has  been  properly  referred  to,  as  affording  a  strik- 
ing proof  of  the  calamities  which  attend  a  state  that  abandons  the  care  of 
its  own  internal  industry.  Her  prosperity  was  the  greatest  when  the  arts, 
brought  there  by  the  Moors,  flourished  most  in  that  kingdom.  Then  she 
received  from  England  her  wool,  and  returned  it  in  the  manufactured  state  ; 
and  then  England  was  least  prosperous.  The  two  nations  have  reversed 
conditions.  Spain,  after  the  discovery  of  America,  yielding  to  an  inordinate 
passion  for  the  gold  of  the  Indies,  sought  in  their  mines  that  wealth  which 
might  have  been  better  created  at  home.  Can  the  remarkable  difference 
in  the  state  of  the  prosperity  of  the  two  countries  be  otherwise  explained, 
than  by  the  opposite  systems  which  they  pursued  ?  England,  by  a  sedu- 
lous attention  to  her  home  industry,  supplied  the  means  of  an  advantageous 


286  SPEECHES    OF    HENEY    CLAY. 

commerce  with  her  colonies.  Spain,  by  an  utter  neglect  of  lier  domestic 
resources,  confided  altogether  in  those  which  she  derived  from  her  colonies, 
and  presents  an  instance  of  the  greatest  adversity.  Her  colonies  were  in- 
finitely more  valuable  than  those  of  England  ;  and,  if  she  had  adopted  a 
similar  policy,  is  it  unreasonable  to  suppose  that,  in  wealth  and  power,  she 
would  have  surpassed  that  of  England?  I  think  the  honorable  gentleman 
from  Virginia  does  great  injustice  to  the  Catholic  religion,  in  specifying 
th;it  as  one  of  the  leading  causes  of  the  decline  of  Spain.  It  is  a  religion 
entitled  to  great  respect ;  and  there  is  nothing  in  its  character  incompatible 
with  the  highest  degree  of  national  prosperity.  Is  not  France,  the  most 
polished,  in  many  other  respects  the  most  distinguished  state,  of  Christen- 
dom, Catholic  ?  Is  not  Flanders,  the  most  populous  part  of  Europe,  also 
Catholic  ?  Are  the  Catholic  parts  of  Switzerland  and  of  Germany  less 
prosperous  than  those  which  are  Protestant  ? 

Tenth.  The  next  objection  of  the  honorable  gentleman  from  Virginia 
which  I  shall  briefly  notice  is,  that  the  manufacturing  system  is  adverse 
to  the  genius  of  our  government,  in  its  tendency  to  the  accumulation  of 
large  capitals  in  a  few  hands ;  in  the  corruption  of  the  public  morals, 
which  is  alleged  to  be  incident  to  it ;  and  in  the  consequent  danger  to  the 
public  liberty.  The  first  part  of  the  objection  would  apply  to  every  lu- 
crative business,  to  commerce,  to  planting,  and  to  the  learned  professions. 
Would  the  gentleman  introduce  the  system  of  Lycurgus  ?  If  his  principle 
be  correct,  it  should  be  extended  to  any  and  every  vocation  which  had  a 
similar  tendency.  The  enormous  fortunes  in  our  country — the  nabobs  of 
the  land — have  been  chiefly  made  by  the  profitable  pursuit  of  that  foreign 
commerce,  in  more  propitious  times,  which  the  honorable  gentleman  would 
so  carefully  cherish.  Immense  estates  have  also  been  made  in  the  South. 
The  dependents  are,  perhaps,  not  more  numerous  upon  that  wealth  which 
is  accumulated  in  manufactures  than  they  are  upon  that  which  is  acquired 
by  commerce  and  by  agriculture.  We  may  safely  confide  in  the  laws  of 
distributions,  and  in  the  absence  of  the  rule  of  primogeniture,  for  the  dis- 
sipation, perhaps  too  rapid,  of  large  fortunes.  What  has  become  of  those 
which  were  held  two  or  three  generations  back  in  Virginia?  Many  of  the 
descendants  of  the  ancient  aristocracy,  as  it  was  called,  of  that  State,  are 
now  in  the  most  indigent  condition.  The  best  security  against  the  de- 
moralization of  society  is  the  constant  and  profitable  employment  of  its 
members.  The  greatest  danger  to  public  liberty  is  from  idleness  and  vice. 
If  manufactures  form  cities,  so  does  commerce.  And  the  disorders  and 
violence  which  proceed  from  the  contagion  of  the  passions,  are  as  fre- 
quent in  one  description  of  those  communities  as  in  the  other.  There 
is  no  doubt  but  that  the  yeomanry  of  a  country  is  the  safest  depository  of 
public  liberty.  In  all  time  to  come,  and  under  any  probable  direction  of 
the  labor  of  our  population,  the  agricultural  class  must  be  much  the 
most  numerous  and  powerful,  and  will  ever  retain,  as  it  ought  to  retain, 
a  preponderating  influence  in  our  councils.     The  extent  and  the  fertility 


ON    AMERICAN   INDUSTRY.  287 

of  our  lands  constitute  an  adequate  security  against  an  excess  in  manufac- 
tures, and  also  against  oppression,  on  the  part  of  capitalists,  toward  the 
laboring-  portions  of  the  community. 

Eleventh.  The  last  objection,  with  a  notice  of  which  I  shall  trouble  the 
committee,  is,  that  the  Constitution  does  not  authorize  the  passage  of  the 
bill.  The  gentleman  from  Virginia  does  not  assert,  indeed,  that  it  is  in- 
consistent with  the  express  provisions  of  that  instrument,  but  he  thinks  it 
incompatible  with  the  spirit  of  the  Constitution.  If  we  attempt  to  provide 
for  the  internal  improvement  of  the  country,  the  Constitution,  according  to 
some  gentlemen,  stands  in  our  way.  If  we  attempt  to  protect  American 
industry  against  foreign  policy  and  the  rivalry  of  foreign  industry,  the  Con- 
stitution presents  an  insuperable  obstacle.  This  Constitution  must  be  a 
most  singular  instrument !  It  seems  to  be  made  for  any  other  people  than 
our  own.  Its  action  is  altogether  foreign.  Congress  has  power  to  lay 
duties  aud  in:mosts,  under  no  other  limitation  whatever  than  that  of  their 
being  uniform  throughout  the  United  States.  But  they  can  only  be  im- 
posed, according  to  the  honorable  gentleman,  for  the  sole  purpose  of 
revenue.  This  is  a  restriction  which  we  do  not  find  in  the  Constitution. 
No  doubt  revenue  was  a  principal  object  with  the  trainers  of  the  Constitu- 
tion in  investing  Congress  with  the  power.  But,  in  executing  it,  may  not  the 
duties  and  imposts  be  so  laid  as  to  secure  domestic  interests  ?  Or  is  Con- 
gress denied  all  discretion  as  to  the  amount  or  the  distribution  of  the  duties 
and  imposts  ? 

The  gentleman  from  Virginia  has,  however,  entirely  mistaken  the  clause 
of  the  Constitution  on  which  we  rely.  It  is  that  whicli  gives  to  Congress 
the  power  to  regulate  commerce  with  foreign  nations.  The  grant  is 
plenary,  without  any  limitation  whatever,  and  includes  the  whole  power 
of  regulation,  of  which  the  subject  to  be  regulated  is  susceptible.  It  is  as 
full  and  complete  a  grant  of  the  power  as  that  is  to  declare  war.  What  is 
a  regulation  of  commerce  ?  It  implies  the  admission  or  exclusion  of  the 
object  of  it,  and  the  terms.  Under  this  power  some  articles,  by  the  exist- 
ing laws,  are  admitted  freely  ;  others  are  subjected  to  duties  so  high  as  to 
amount  to  their  prohibition,  and  various  rates  of  duties  are  applied  to 
others.  Under  this  power,  laws  of  total  non-intercourse  with  some  nations, 
embargoes,  producing  an  entire  cessation  of  commerce  with  all  foreign 
countries  have  been,  from  time  to  time,  passed.  These  laws,  I  have  no 
doubt,  met  with  the  entire  approbation  of  the  gentleman  from  Virginia. 
[Mr.  Barbour  said  that  he  was  not  in  Congress.]  Wherever  the  gentle- 
man was,  whether  on  his  farm  or  in  the  pursuit  of  that  profession  of  which 
he  is  an  ornament,  I  have  no  doubt  that  he  gave  his  zealous  support  to  the 
laws  referred  to. 

The  principle  of  the  system  under  consideration  has  the  sanction  of 
some  of  the  best  and  wisest  men,  in  all  ages,  in  foreign  countries  as  well 
as  in  our  own — of  the  Edwards,  of  Henry  the  Great,  of  Elizabeth,  of  the 
Colberts,  abroad  ;  of  our  Franklin,  Jefferson,  Madison,  Hamilton,  at  home. 


288  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

But  it  comes  recommended  to  us  by  a  higher  authority  than  any  of  these 
illustrious  as  they  unquestionably  are — by  the  master-spirit  of  the  age — 
that  extraordinary  man,  who  has  thrown  the  Alexanders  and  the  Caesars 
infinitely  further  behind  him  than  they  stood  in  advance  of  the  most 
eminent  of  their  predecessors — that  singular  man  who,  whether  he  was 
seated  on  his  imperial  throne,  deciding  the  fate  of  nations  and  allotting 
kingdoms  to  the  members  of  his  family,  with  the  same  composure,  if  not 
with  the  same  affection,  as  that  with  which  a  Virginia  father  divides  his 
plantations  among  his  children,  or  on  the  miserable  rock  of  St.  Helena,  to 
which  he  was  condemned  by  the  cruelty  and  the  injustice  of  his  unworthy 
victors,  is  equally  an  object  of  the  most  intense  admiration.  He  appears 
to  have  comprehended,  with  the  rapidity  of  intuition,  the  true  interests  of 
a  State,  and  to  have  been  able,  by  the  turn  of  a  single  expression,  to  de- 
velop the  secret  springs  of  the  policy  of  cabinets.  We  find  that  Las 
Casas  reports  bim  to  have  said  : 

"  He  opposed  the  principles  of  economists,  which  he  said  were  correct  in 
theory,  though  erroneous  in  their  application.  The  political  constitution 
of  different  States,  continued  he,  must  render  these  principles  defective ; 
local  circumstances  continually  call  for  deviations  from  their  uniformity. 
Duties,  he  said,  which  were  so  severely  condemned  by  political  economists, 
should  not,  it  is  true,  be  an  object  to  the  treasury ;  they  should  be  the 
guaranty  and  protection  of  a  nation,  and  should  correspond  with  the  nature 
and  the  objects  of  its  trade.  Holland,  which  is  destitute  of  productions 
and  manufactures,  and  which  has  a  trade  only  of  transit  and  commission, 
should  be  free  of  all  fetters  and  barriers.  France,  on  the  contrary,  which  is 
rich  in  every  sort  of  production  and  manufactures,  should  incessantly  guard 
against  the  importations  of  a  rival,  who  might  still  continue  superior  to  her, 
and  also  against  the  cupidity,  egotism,  and  indifference  of  mere  brokers. 

"  I  have  not  fallen  into  the  error  of  modern  systematizers,"  said  the 
emperor,  "  who  imagine  that  all  the  wisdom  of  nations  is  centred  in  them- 
selves. Experience  is  the  true  wisdom  of  nations.  And  what  does  all  the 
reasoning  of  economists  amount  to  ?  They  incessantly  extol  the  prosperity 
of  England,  and  hold  her  up  as  our  model ;  but  the  custom-house  system 
is  more  burdensome  and  arbitrary  in  England  than  in  any  other  country. 
They  also  condemn  prohibitions ;  yet  it  was  England  set  the  example  of 
prohibitions  ;  and  they  are  in  fact  necessary  with  regard  to  certain  objects. 
Duties  can  not  adequately  supply  the  place  of  prohibitions;  there  will 
always  be  found  means  to  defeat  the  object  of  the  legislator.  In  France 
we  are  still  very  far  behind  on  these  delicate  points,  which  are  still  un- 
perceived  or  ill  understood  by  the  mass  of  society.  Yet,  what  advancement 
have  we  now  made  ;  what  correctness  of  ideas  has  been  introduced  by  my 
gradual  classification  of  agriculture,  industry,  and  trade  ;  objects  so  distinct 
in  themselves,  and  which  present  so  great  and  positive  a  graduation  ! 

Y"  First.  Agriculture  ;  the  soul,  the  first  basis,  of  the  empire. 
"  Second.     Industry  ;  the  comfort  and  happiness  of  the  population. 


ON    AMERICAN   INDUSTRY.  289 

"  Third.  Foreign  Trade  ;  the  superabundance,  the  proper  application,  of 
the  surplus  of  agriculture  and  industry. 

"  Agriculture  was  continually  improved  during  the  whole  course  of  the 
revolution.  Foreigners  thought  it  ruined  in  France.  In  1814,  however, 
the  English  were  compelled  to  admit  that  we  had  little  or  nothing  to  learn 
from  them. 

"  Industry  or  manufactures,  and  internal  trade,  made  immense  progress 
during  my  reign.  The  application  of  chemistry  to  the  manufactures,  caused 
them  to  advance  with  giant  strides.  I  gave  an  impulse,  the  effects  of  which 
extended  throughout  Europe. 

"  Foreign  trade,  which,  in  its  results,  is  infinitely  inferior  to  agriculture, 
was  an  object  of  subordinate  importance  in  my  mind.  Foreign  trade  is 
made  for  agriculture  and  home  industry,  and  not  the  two  latter  for  the 
former.  The  interests  of  these  three  fundamental  cases  are  diverging  and 
frequently  conflicting.  I  always  promoted  them  in  their  natural  grada- 
tion, but  I  could  not  and  ought  not  to  have  ranked  them  all  on  an  equality. 
Time  will  unfold  what  I  have  done,  the  national  resources  which  I  created, 
and  the  emancipation  from  the  English  which  I  brought  about.  We  have 
now  the  secret  of  the  commercial  treaty  of  1783.  France  still  exclaims 
against  its  author  ;  but  the  English  demanded  it  on  pain  of  resuming  the 
war.  They  wished  to  do  the  same  after  the  treaty  of  Amiens,  but  I  was 
then  all-powerful ;  I  was  a  hundred  cubits  high.  I  replied,  that  if  they 
were  in  possession  of  the  heights  of  Montmartre  I  would  still  refuse  to 
sign  the  treaty.     These  words  were  echoed  through  Europe. 

"  The  English  will  now  impose  some  such  treaty  on  France,  at  least,  if 
popular  clamor  aud  the  opposition  of  the  mass  of  the  nation,  do  not  force 
them  to  draw  back.  This  thraldom  would  be  an  additional  disgrace  in  the 
eyes  of  that  nation,  which  is  now  beginning  to  acquire  a  just  perception 
of  her  own  interests. 

"  When  I  came  to  the  head  of  the  government,  the  American  ships, 
which  were  permitted  to  enter  our  ports  on  the  score  of  their  neutrality, 
brought  us  raw  materials,  and  had  the  impudence  to  sail  from  France  with- 
out freight,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  in  cargoes  of  English  goods  in  Lon- 
don. They,  moreover,  had  the  insolence  to  make  their  payments,  when 
they  had  any  to  make,  by  giving  bills  on  persons  in  London.  Hence  the 
vast  profits  reaped  by  the  English  manufacturers  and  brokers,  entirely  to 
our  prejudice.  I  made  a  law  that  no  American  should  import  goods  to, 
any  amount,  without  immediately  exporting  their  exact  equivalent.  A 
loud  outcry  was  raised  against  this :  it  was  said  that  I  had  ruined  trade. 
But  what  was  the  consequence  ?  Notwithstanding  the  closing  of  my  ports 
and  in  spite  of  the  English  who  ruled  the  seas,  the  Americans  returned  and 
submitted  to  my  regulations.  What  might  I  not  have  done  under  more 
favorable  circumstances 

"  Thus  I  naturalized  in  France  the  manufacture  of  cotton,  which  in- 
cludes, 

19 


290  SPEECHES  OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

"  First,  spun  cotton.  We  did  not  previously  spin  it  ourselves  ;  the  En- 
glish supplied  us  with  it,  as  a  sort  of  favor. 

"  Secondly,  the  web.  We  did  not  yet  make  it ;  it  came  to  us  from 
abroad. 

"  Thirdly,  the  printing.  This  was  the  only  part  of  the  manufacture  that 
we  performed  ourselves.  I  wished  to  naturalize  the  two  first  branches ; 
and  I  proposed  to  the  Council  of  State,  that  their  importation  should  be 
prohibited.  This  excited  great  alarm.  I  sent  for  Oberkamp,  and  I  con- 
versed with  him  a  long  time.  I  learned  from  him,  that  this  prohibition 
would  doubtless  produce  a  shock,  but  that,  after  a  year  or  two  of  persever- 
ance, it  would  prove  a  triumph,  whence  we  should  derive  immense  advan- 
tages. Then  I  issued  my  decree  in  spite  of  all ;  this  was  a  true  piece  of 
statesmanship. 

"  I  at  first  confined  myself  merely  to  prohibiting  the  web  ;  then  I  extend- 
ed the  prohibition  to  spun  cotton ;  and  we  now  possess,  within  ourselves, 
the  three  branches  of  the  cotton  manufacture,  to  the  great  benefit  of  our 
population,  and  the  injury  and  regret  of  the  English;  which  proves  that, 
in  civil  government,  as  well  as  in  war,  decision  of  character  is  often  indis- 
pensable to  success." 

I  will  trouble  the  committee  with  only  one  other  quotation,  which  I  shall 
make  from  Lowe  ;  and  from  hearing  which,  the  committee  must  share  with 
me  in  the  mortification  which  I  felt  on  perusing  it.  That  author  says,  "  It 
is  now  above  forty  years  since  the  United  States  of  America  were  definite- 
ly separated  from  us,  and  since,  their  situation  has  afforded  a  proof  that  the 
benefit  of  mercantile  intercourse  may  be  retained,  in  all  its  extent,  without 
the  care  of  governing,  or  the  expense  of  defending,  these  once  regretted 
provinces."  Is  there  not  too  much  truth  in  this  observation  ?  By  adher- 
ing to  the  foreign  policy,  which  I  have  been  discussing,  do  we  not  remain 
essentially  British,  in  every  thing  but  the  form  of  our  government  ?  Are 
not  our  interests,  our  industry,  our  commerce,  so  modified  as  to  swell 
British  pride,  and  to  increase  British  power  ? 

Mr.  Chairman,  our  confederacy  comprehends,  within  its  vast  limits,  great 
diversity  of  interests  :  agricultural,  planting,  farming,  commercial,  navigat- 
ing, fishing,  manufacturing.  No  one  of  these  interests  is  felt  in  the  same 
degree,  and  cherished  with  the  same  solicitude,  throughout  all  parts  of  the 
Union.  Some  of  them  are  peculiar  to  particular  sections  of  our  common 
country.  But  all  these  great  interests  are  confided  to  the  protection  of 
one  government — to  the  fate  of  one  ship — and  a  most  gallant  ship  it  is, 
with  a  noble  crew.  If  we  prosper,  and  are  happy,  protection  must  be  ex- 
tended to  all ;  it  is  due  to  all.  It  is  the  great  principle  on  which  obe- 
dience is  demanded  from  all.  If  our  essential  interests  can  not  find  pro- 
tection from  our  own  government  against  the  policy  of  foreign  powers, 
where  are  they  to  get  it?  We  did  not  unite  for  sacrifice,  but  for  preservation. 
The  inquiry  should  be,  in  reference  to  the  great  interests  of  every  sec 
tion  of  the  Union  (I  speak  not  of  minute  subdivisions),  what  would  be  done 


ON   AMERICAN  INDUSTRY.  #  291 

for  those  interests  if  that  section  stood  alone  and  separated  from  the  resi- 
due of  the  republic  ?  If  the  promotion  of  those  interests  would  not  in- 
juriously affect  any  other  section,  then  every  thing  should  be  done  for 
them,  which  would  be  done  if  it  formed  a  distinct  government.  If  they 
come  into  absolute  collision  with  the  interests  of  another  section,  a  recon- 
ciliation, if  possible,  should  be  attempted,  by  mutual  concession,  so  as  to 
avoid  a  sacrifice  of  the  prosperity  of  either  to  that  of  the  other.  In  such 
a  case,  all  should  not  be  done  for  one  which  would  be  done,  if  it  were 
separated  and  independent,  but  something  ;  and,  in  devising  the  measure, 
the  good  of  each  part  and  of  the  whole,  should  be  carefully  consulted. 
This  is  the  only  mode  by  which  we  can  preserve,  in  full  vigor,  the  harmony 
of  the  whole  Union.  The  South  entertains  one  opinion,  and  imagines  that 
a  modification  of  the  existing  policy  of  the  country,  for  the  protection  of 
American  industry,  involves  the  ruin  of  the  South.  The  North,  the  East, 
the  West,  hold  the  opposite  opinion,  and  feel  and  contemplate,  in  a  longer 
adherence  to  the  foreign  policy,  as  it  now  exists,  their  utter  destruction. 
Is  it  true,  that  the  interests  of  these  great  sections  of  our  country  are  ir- 
reconcilable with  each  other  ?  Are  we  reduced  to  the  sad  and  afflicting 
dilemma  of  determining  which  shall  fall  a  victim  to  the  prosperity  of  the 
other  ?  Happily,  I  think,  there  is  no  such  distressing  alternative.  If  the 
North,  the  West,  and  the  East,  formed  an  independent  State,  unassociated 
with  the  South,  can  there  be  a  doubt  that  the  restrictive  system  would  be 
carried  to  the  point  of  prohibition  of  every  foreign  fabric  of  which  they 
produce  the  raw  material,  and  which  they  could  manufacture  ?  Such 
would  be  their  policy,  if  they  stood  alone  ;  but  they  are  fortunately  con- 
nected with  the  South,  which  believes  its  interests  to  require  a  free  admis- 
sion of  foreign  manufactures.  Here  then  is  a  case  for  mutual  concession, 
for  fair  compromise.  The  bill  under  consideration  presents  this  compro- 
mise. It  is  a  medium  between  the  absolute  exclusion  and  the  unrestricted 
admission  of  the  produce  of  foreign  industry.  It  sacrifices  the  interest  of 
neither  section  to  that  of  the  other ;  neither,  it  is  true,  gets  all  that  it 
wants,  nor  is  subject  to  all  that  it  fears.  But  it  has  been  said  that  the 
South  obtains  nothing  in  this  compromise.  Does  it  lose  any  thing  ?  is  the 
first  question.  I  have  endeavored  to  prove  that  it  does  not,  by  showing 
that  a  mere  transfer  is  effected  in  the  source  of  the  supply  of  its  consump- 
tion from  Europe  to  America ;  and  that  the  loss,  whatever  it  may  be,  of 
the  sale  of  its  great  staple  in  Europe,  is  compensated  by  the  new  market 
created  in  America.  But  does  the  South  really  gain  nothing  in  this  com- 
promise ?  The  consumption  of  the  other  sections,  though  somewhat  re- 
stricted, is  still  left  open  by  this  bill,  to  foreign  fabrics  purchased  by 
southern  staples.  So  far  its  operation  is  beneficial  to  the  South,  and  pre- 
judicial to  the  industry  of  the  other  sections,  and  that  is  the  point  of 
mutual  concession.  The  South  will  also  gain  by  the  extended  consump- 
tion of  its  great  staple,  produced  by  an  increased  capacity  to  consume  it 
in  consequence  of  the  establishment  of  the  home  market.     But  the  South 


292  t  SrEECHES  OF  henry  clay. 

can  not  exert  its  industry  and  enterprise  in  the  business  of  manufactures  ! 
Why  not  ?  The  difficulties,  if  not  exaggerated,  are  artificial,  and  may, 
therefore,  be  surmounted.  But  can  the  other  sections  embark  in  the 
planting  occupations  of  the  South  ?  The  obstructions  which  forbid  them 
are  natural,  created  by  the  immutable  laws  of  God,  and,  therefore,  un- 
conquerable. 

Other  and  animating  considerations  invite  us  to  adopt  the  policy  of  this 
system.  Its  importance,  in  connection  with  the  general  defense  in  time  Oi 
war,  can  not  fail  to  be  duly  estimated.  Need  I  recall  to  our  painful  recol- 
lection the  sufferings,  for  the  want  of  an  adequate  supply  of  absolute  nec- 
essaries, to  which  the  defenders  of  their  country's  rights  and  our  entire 
population,  were  subjected  during  the  late  war  ?  Or  to  remind  the  com- 
mittee of  the  great  advantage  of  a  steady  and  unfailing  source  of  supply, 
unaffected  alike  in  war  and  in  peace  ?  Its  importance,  in  reference  to  the 
stability  of  our  Union,  that  paramount  and  greatest  of  all  our  interests, 
can  not  fail  warmly  to  recommend  it,  or  at  least  to  conciliate  the  forbear- 
ance of  every  patriot  bosom.  Now  our  people  present  the  spectacle  of  a 
vast  assemblage  of  jealous  rivals,  all  eagerly  rushing  to  the  sea-board, 
jostling  each  other  in  their  way,  to  hurry  off  to  glutted  foreign  markets 
the  perishable  produce  of  their  labor.  The  tendency  of  that  policy,  in 
conformity  to  which  this  bill  is  prepared,  is  to  transform  these  competitors 
into  friends  and  mutual  customers  ;  and,  by  the  reciprocal  exchanges  of  their 
respective  productions,  to  place  the  confederacy  upon  the  most  solid  of  all 
foundations,  the  basis  of  common  interest.  And  is  not  government  called 
upon,  by  every  stimulating  motive,  to  adapt  its  policy  to  the  actual  condi- 
tion and  extended  growth  of  our  great  republic  ?  At  the  commencement 
of  our  Constitution,  almost  the  whole  population  of  the  United  States  was 
confined  between  the  Alleghany  mountains  and  the  Atlantic  ocean.  Since 
that  epoch,  the  western  part  of  New  York,  of  Pennsylvania,  of  Virginia, 
all  the  western  States  and  Territories,  have  been  principally  peopled.  Prior 
to  that  period  we  had  scarcely  any  interior.  An  interior  has  sprung  up, 
as  it  were  by  enchantment,  and  along  with  it  new  interests  and  new  rela- 
tions, requiring  the  parental  protection  of  governmeut.  Our  policy  should 
be  modified  accordingly,  so  as  to  comprehend  all,  and  sacrifice  none.  And 
are  we  not  encouraged  by  the  success  of  past  experience,  in  respect  to  the 
only  article  which  has  been  adequately  protected  ?  Already  have  the  pre- 
dictions and  the  friends  of  the  American  system,  in  even  a  shorter  time 
than  their  most  sanguine  hopes  could  have  anticipated,  been  completely 
realized  in  regard  to  that  article  ;  and  consumption  is  now  better  and  more 
cheaply  supplied  with  coarse  cottons,  than  it  was  under  the  prevalence  of 
the  foreign  system. 

Even  if  the  benefits  of  the  policy  were  limited  to  certain  sections  of  our 
country,  would  it  not  be  satisfactory  to  behold  American  industry,  wher- 
ever situated,  active,  animated,  and  thrifty,  rather  than  persevere  in  a 
course  which  renders  us  subservient  to  foreign  industry  ?     But  these  ben- 


ON   AMERICAN   INDUSTRY.  293 

efits  are  twofold,  direct,  and  collateral,  and,  in  the  one  shape  or  the  other, 
they  will  diffuse  themselves   throughout   the  Union.     All   parts  of  the 
Union  will  participate,  more  or  less,  in  both.     As  to  the  direct  benefit,  it 
is  probable  that  the  North  and  the  East  will  enjoy  the  largest  share.     But 
the  West  and  the  South  will  also  participate  in  them.     Philadelphia,  Bal- 
timore, and  Richmond,  will  divide  with  the  northern  capitals  the  business 
of  manufacturing.     The  latter  city  unites  more  advantages  for  its  success- 
ful prosecution  than  any  other  place  I  know,  Zanesville,  in  Ohio,  only  ex- 
cepted.    And  where  the  direct  benefit  does  not  accrue,  that  will  be  enjoyed 
of  supplying  the  raw  material  and  provisions  for  the  consumption   of 
artisans.     Is  it  not  most  desirable  to  put  at  rest  and  prevent  the  annual 
recurrence  of  this  unpleasaut  subject,  so  well  fitted,  by  the  various  interests 
to  which  it  appeals,  to  excite  irritation  and  to  produce  discontent  ?     Can 
that  be  effected  by  its  rejection  ?     Behold  the  mass  of  petitions  which  lie 
on  our  table,  earnestly  and  auxiously  entreating  the  protecting  interposition 
of  Congress  against  the  ruinous  policy  which  we    are    pursuing.     Will 
these  petitioners,  comprehending  all  orders  of  society,  entire  States  and 
communities,  public  companies  and  private   individuals,  spontaneously  as- 
sembling, cease  in  their  humble  prayers  by  your  lending  a  deaf  ear  ?     Can 
you  expect  that  these  petitioners   and  others,  in  countless  numbers,  that 
will,  if  you  delay  the  passage  of  this  bill,  supplicate  your  mercy,  should 
contemplate  their  substance  gradually  withdraw  to  foreign  countries,  their 
ruin  slow,  but  certain  and  as  inevitable  as  death  itself,  without  one  expiring 
effort  ?     You  think  the  measure  injurious  to  you ;  we  believe  our  preserva- 
tion depends  upon  its  adoption.     Our  convictions,  mutually  honest,  are 
equally  strong.     What  is  to  be  done  ?     I  invoke  that  saving  spirit  of  mu- 
tual concession   under  which  our  blessed  Constitution   was   formed,  and 
under  which  alone  it  can  be  happily  administered.     I  appeal  to  the  South 
—to  the  high-minded,  generous,  and  patriotic  South — with  which  I  have 
so  often  co-operated,  in  attempting  to  sustain  the  honor  and  to  vindicate  the 
rights  of  our  country.     Should  it  not  offer,  upon  the  altar  of  the  public 
good,  some  sacrifice  of  its  peculiar  opinions  ?     Of  Avhat  does  it  complain  ? 
A  possible  temporary  enhancement  in  the  objects  of  consumption.     Of 
what  do  we  complain  ?     A  total  incapacity,  produced  by  the  foreign  policy, 
to  purchase,  at  any  price,  necessary  foreign  objects  of  consumption.     In 
such  an  alternative,  inconvenient  only  to  it,  ruinous  to  us,  can  we  expect 
too  much  from  southern  magnanimity  ?     The  just  and  confident  expecta- 
tion of  the  passage  of  this  bill  has  flooded  the  country  with  recent  import- 
ations of  foreign  fabrics.     If  it  should  not  pass,  they  will  complete  the 
work  of  destruction  of  our  domestic  industry.     If  it  should  pass,  they  will 
prevent  any  considerable  rise   in  the  price  of  foreign  commodities,  until 
our  own  industry  shall  be  able  to  supply  competent  substitutes. 

To  the  friends  of  the  tariff  I  would  also  anxiously  appeal.  Every  ar- 
rangement of  its  provisions  does  not  suit  each  of  you ;  you  desire  some 
further  alterations ;  you  would  make  it  perfect.     You  want  what  you  will 


294  SPEECHES   OF   HENBY   CLAY. 

never  get.  Nothing  human  is  perfect.  And  I  have  seen,  with  great  sur- 
prise, a  piece  signed  by  a  member  of  Congress,  published  in  the  "  National 
Intelligencer,"  stating  that  this  bill  must  be  rejected,  and  a  judicious  tariff 
brought  in  as  its  substitute.  A  judicious  tariff!  No  member  of  Congress 
could  have  signed  that  piece ;  or,  if  he  did,  the  public  ought  not  to  be 
deceived.  If  this  bill  do  not  pass,  unquestionably  no  other  can  pass  at 
this  session,  or  probably  during  this  Congress.  And  who  will  go  home 
and  say  that  he  rejected  all  the  benefits  of  this  bill,  because  molasses  has 
been  subjected  to  the  enormous  additional  duty  of  five  cents  per  gallon  ? 
I  call,  therefore,  upon  the  friends  of  the  American  policy,  to  yield  some- 
what of  their  own  peculiar  wishes,  and  not  to  reject  the  practicable  in  the 
idle  pursuit  after  the  unattainable.  Let  us  imitate  the  illustrious  example 
of  the  framers  of  the  Constitution,  and  always  remembering  that  whatever 
springs  from  man  partakes  of  his  imperfections,  depend  upon  experience 
to  suggest,  in  future,  the  necessary  amendments. 

We  have  had  great  difficulties  to  encounter.  First,  the  splendid  talents 
which  are  arrayed  in  this  House  against  us.  Second,  we  are  opposed  by 
the  rich  and  powerful  in  the  land.  Third,  the  executive  government,  if 
any,  affords  us  but  a  cold  and  equivocal,  support.  Fourth,  the  importing 
and  navigating  interest,  I  verily  believe  from  misconception,  are  adverse  to 
us.  Fifth,  the  British  factors  and  the  British  influence  are  inimical  to  our 
success.  Sixth,  long-established  habits  and  prejudices  oppose  us.  Sev- 
enth, the  reviewers  and  literary  speculators,  foreign  and  domestic.  And, 
lastly,  the  leading  presses  of  the  country,  including  the  influence  of  that 
which  is  established  in  this  city,  and  sustained  by  the  public  purse. 

From  some  of  these,  or  other  causes,  the  bill  may  be  postponed,  thwarted, 
defeated.  But  the  cause  is  the  cause  of  the  country,  and  it  must  and  will 
prevail.  It  is  founded  in  the  interests  and  affections  of  the  people.  It  is 
as  native  as  the  granite  deeply  imbosomed  in  our  mountains.  And,  in  con- 
clusion, I  would  pray  God,  in  his  infinite  mercy,  to  avert  from  our  country 
the  evils  which  are  impending  over  it,  and,  by  enlightening  our  councils, 
to  conduct  us  into  that  path  which  leads  to  riches,  to  greatness,  to  glory. 


REPLY   TO   JOHN   RANDOLPH. 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OP  REPRESENTATIVES,  1824. 

[Notwithstanding  Mr.  Randolph,  from  some  cause  which  we 
will  not  attempt  to  divine,  had  shown  much  disposition  to  annoy 
Mr.  Clay  as  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  and  made 
many  thrusts  at  him,  and  notwithstanding  the  duel  between 
them,  they  met  at  last  in  perfect  amity,  in  the  Senate  chamber, 
when  Mr.  Kandolph,  being  in  declining  health,  and  apparently 
near  his  end,  approached  Mr.  Clay,  and  gave  him  his  hand.  It 
was  a  touching  interview.  The  following  morceau,  in  reply  to 
one  of  Mr.  Randolph's  assaults,  is  worth  preserving,  and  shows 
a  pacific  disposition,  mingled  with  pleasantry.] 

Sir,  I  am  growing  old.  I  have  had  some  little  measure  of  experience 
in  public  life,  and  the  result  of  that  experience  has  brought  me  to  this 
conclusion,  that  when  business,  of  whatever  nature,  is  to  be  transacted  in  a 
deliberative  assembly,  or  in  private  life,  courtesy,  forbearance,  and  modera- 
tion, are  best  calculated  to  bring  it  to  a  successful  conclusion.  Sir,  my 
age  admonishes  me  to  abstain  from  involving  myself  in  personal  difficulties; 
would  to  God  that  I  could  say,  I  am  also  restrained  by  higher  motives. 
I  certainly  never  sought  any  collision  with  the  gentleman  from  Virginia. 
My  situation  at  this  time  is  peculiar,  if  it  be  nothing  else,  and  might,  I 
should  think,  dissuade,  at  least,  a  generous  heart  from  any  wish  to  draw 
me  into  circumstances  of  personal  altercation.  I  have  experienced  this 
magnanimity  from  some  quarters  of  the  House.  But  I  regret,  that  from 
others  it  appears  to  have  no  such  consideration.  The  gentleman  from 
Virginia  was  pleased  to  say,  that  in  one  point  at  least  he  coincided  with 
me — in  an  humble  estimate  of  my  grammatical  and  philological  acquire- 
ments. I  know  my  deficiencies.  I  was  born  to  no  proud  patrimonial  es- 
tate ;  from  my  father  I  inherited  only  infancy,  ignorance,  and  indigence.  I 
feel  my  defects ;  but,  so  far  as  my  situation  in  early  life  is  concerned,  I  may, 
without  presumption,  say  they  are  more  my  misfortune  than  my  fault. 
But,  however  I  regret  my  want  of  ability  to  furnish  to  the  gentleman  a 
better  specimen  of  powers  of  verbal  criticism,  I  will  venture  to  say,  it  is 
not  greater  than  the  disappointment  of  this  committee  as  to  the  strength 
of  his  argument. 


ADDRESS  TO  GENERAL  LAFAYETTE. 

IN  THE  HOUSE  OP  REPRESENTATIVES,  DECEMBER  10,  1824. 

[Mr.  Clay  being  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives 
when  General  Lafayette  was  presented  to  that  body,  it  devolved 
on  him  to  welcome  the  nation's  guest ;  and  the  following  is  a 
copy  of  his  brief  speech  on  that  interesting  occasion.  Forty 
years  had  elapsed  since  General  Lafayette  had  left  our  shores, 
and  he,  in  the  mean  time,  had  enacted  a  prominent  part  in  the 
eventful  changes  through  which  his  own  country  had  passed, 
besides  having  been  once  in  captivity  for  his  country's  cause.  A 
young  man,  he  came  to  assist  America  in  her  struggle  for  free- 
dom, was  the  companion  in  arms  of  Washington,  and  continued 
in  our  service  till  the  close  of  the  Revolutionary  War.  Grateful 
for  these  services,  the  American  people,  through  their  represent- 
atives at  Washington,  had  invited  Lafayette  to  visit  this  country 
in  his  old  age,  as  the  nation's  guest,  and  sent  a  public  ship  to 
bring  him  to  our  shores.  This  invitation  was  accepted,  and 
General  Lafayette  had  made  his  tour  of  the  States,  everywhere 
honored  by  an  uninterrupted  ovation,  before  Congress  assembled. 
It  was  peculiarly  fit,  that  the  most  prominent  and  most  influen- 
tial American  statesman  in  the  war  of  1812,  should  welcome  to 
our  midst  this  volunteer  soldier  of  the  war  of  1776,  who  left  his 
own  country  to  fight  our  battles  in  company  with  Washington, 
and  who  never  left  the  field  till  our  independence  was  achieved. 
Mr.  Clay,  crowned  with  a  civic  laurel,  stood  in  the  presence  of 
the  man,  who,  a  foreigner,  had  staked  his  fortune  and  drawn  his 
sword  for  American  Liberty,  when  it  hung  doubtful  in  the  scales 
of  the  future,  and  whose  brow  was  covered  with  military  chap- 
lets,  won  on  our  own  soil,  and  on  that  of  his  own  country. 
Such  were  the  men  brought  together  as  speakers  on  this  occa- 
sion— one  to  express  the  gratitude  of  a  nation,  and  the  other  to 
receive  the  first  meed  of  praise  for  services,  long  past,  in  behalf 
of  a  generation  now  for  the  most  part  in  their  graves.  But, 
while  men  die,  history  lives,  and  imparts  unfading  renown  to 


ADDRESS    TO   LA    FAYETTTE.  297 

those  who  have  justly  earned  it.  It  is  rare,  in  the  history  of  the 
world,  that  such  an  occasion  occurs  as  that  on  which  the  follow- 
ing address  was  delivered  ;  and  still  more  rare,  that  speakers 
occuj^ying  a  like  relative  position  should  grace  it  and  make  it 
memorable.] 

General,  The  House  of  Representatives  of  the  United  States,  impelled 
alike  by  its  own  feelings,  and  by  those  of  the  whole  American  people, 
could  not  have  assigned  to  me  a  more  gratifying  duty  than  that  of  present- 
ing to  you  cordial  congratulations  upon  the  occasion  of  your  recent  arrival 
in  the  United  States,  in  compliance  with  the  Avishes  of  Congress,  and  to 
assure  you  of  the  very  high  satisfaction  which  your  presence  affords  on 
this  early  theater  of  your  glory  and  renown.  Although  but  few  of  the 
members  who  compose  this  body  shared  with  you  in  the  war  of  our  Revo- 
lution, all  have,  from  impartial  history,  or  from  faithful  tradition,  a  knowl- 
edge of  the  perils,  the  sufferings,  and  the  sacrifices,  which  you  voluntarily 
encountered,  and  the  signal  services,  in  America  and  in  Europe,  which  you 
performed  for  an  infant,  a  distant,  and  an  alien  people ;  and  all  feel  and 
own  the  very  great  extent  of  the  obligations  under  which  you  have  placed 
our  country.  But  the  relations  in  which  you  have  ever  stood  to  the 
United  States,  interesting  and  important  as  they  have  been,  do  not  consti- 
tute the  only  motive  of  the  respect  and  admiration  which  the  House  of 
Representatives  entertain  for  you.  Your  consistency  of  character,  your 
uniform  devotion  to  regulated  liberty,  in  all  the  vicissitudes  of  a  long  and 
arduous  life,  also  commands  its  admiration.  During  all  the  recent  convul- 
sions of  Europe,  amid,  as  after  the  dispersion  of,  every  political  storm,  the 
people  of  the  United  States  have  beheld  you,  true  to  your  old  principles, 
firm  and  erect,  cheering  and  animating  with  your  well-known  voice,  the 
votaries  of  liberty,  its  faithful  and  fearless  champion,  ready  to  shed  the  last 
drop  of  that  blood  which  here  you  so  freely  and  nobly  spilled,  in  the  same 
holy  cause. 

The  vain  wish  has  been  sometimes  indulged,  that  Providence  would 
allow  the  patriot,  after  death,  to  return  to  his  country,  and  to  contemplate 
the  intermediate  changes  which  had  taken  place ;  to  view  the  forests 
felled,  the  cities  built,  the  mountains  leveled,  the  canals  cut,  the  highways 
constructed,  the  progress  of  the  arts,  the  advancement  of  learning,  and  the 
increase  of  population.  General,  your  present  visit  to  the  United  States  is 
a  realization  of  the  consoling  object  of  that  wish.  You  are  in  the  midst 
of  posterity.  Everywhere,  you  must  have  been  struck  with  the  great 
changes,  physical  and  moral,  which  have  occurred  since  you  left  us.  Even 
this  very  city,  bearing  a  venerated  name,  alike  endeared  to  you  and  to  us, 
has  since  emerged  from  the  forest  which  then  covered  its  site.  In  one  re- 
spect you  behold  us  unaltered,  and  this  is  in  the  sentiment  of  continued 
devotion  to  liberty,  and  of  ardent  affection  and  profound  gratitude  to  your 


298  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

departed  friend,  the  father  of  his  country,  and  to  you,  and  to  your  illus- 
trious associates  in  the  field  and  in  the  cabinet,  for  the  multiplied  blessings 
which  surround  us,  and  for  the  very  privilege  of  addressing  you  which  I 
now  exercise.  This  sentiment,  now  fondly  cherished  by  more  than  ten 
millions  of  people,  will  be  transmitted,  with  unabated  vigor,  down  the  tide 
of  time,  through  the  countless  millions  who  are  destined  to  inhabit  this 
continent,  to  the  latest  posterity. 

[General  Lafayette  replied  to  this  address  in  a  befitting  and  touching  man- 
ner.] 


MR.  CLAY'S  ADDRESS  TO  HIS  CONSTITUENTS, 

ON  THE  PRESIDENTIAL  ELECTION  OF  1825.     MARCH  26,  1825. 

[This,  as  will  be  seen,  is  one  of  Mr.  Clay's  literary  composi- 
tions, and  not  a  reported  speech.     It  is  dated  some  twenty  days 
after  he  had  entered  on  his  duties  as  Secretary  of  State,  under 
Mr.  Adams,  and  was  written  to  vindicate  himself  before  his  con- 
stituents in  Kentucky,  and  before  the  country,  from  the  charge 
of  "  bargain  and  corruption,"  with  which  he  had  been  so  vio- 
lently assailed,  for  the  part  he  took,  as  a  member  of  the  House 
of  Kepresentatives,  in   the  Presidential   election  of  February, 
1825.     It  mattered  not  whether  General  Jackson  or  Mr.  Adams 
should  have  been  elected  President  by  the  House,  Mr.  Clay  was 
bound  to  be  Secretary  of  State,  if  the  wishes  of  the  country  and 
of  the  great  West  had  been  regarded.     Whether  authorized  by 
General  Jackson  himself,  or  not,  it  is  certain  that  this  office  was 
tendered  to  him,  by  the   General's  friends,  through  Mr.  Bu- 
chanan, if  he  (Mr.  Clay)  would  support  the  General's  preten- 
sions.    But  no  such  offer  was  made  by  Mr.  Adams,  nor  was 
there  any  tacit  understanding  to  this  effect.     On  the  contrary, 
so  far  as  it  is  possible  to  prove  a  negative,  it  has  been  demon- 
strated.    Mr.  Clay  denied  any  such  overtures  from  Mr.  Adams 
or  his  friends  ;  but  he  has  caused  it  to  be  recorded  in  history, 
that  it  was  made  to  him  by  Mr.  Buchanan,  for  General  Jackson, 
or  in  his  behalf.     Unfortunately,  however,  Mr.  Clay's  relations 
to  General  Jackson  and  his  friends  were  not  of  an  auspicious 
character.     He  did  not  respect  General  Jackson's  claims,  but 
thought  him  very  unqualified  for  civil  trusts,  although  he  con- 
ceded to  him  a  very  high  order  of  military  talents. 

There  was  a  natural  ground  of  suspicion  with  General  Jackson 
and  his  friends,  toward  Mr  Clay,  and  while  Mr.  Clay  refused  to 
throw  himself  into  their  hands,  their  inference  was,  that  he  was 
engaged  in  a  conspiracy  against  them.  Ready  to  bargain  them- 
selves, they  also  believed  that  Mr.  Clay  would  bargain  on  one 
side  or  the  other  ;  and  they  believed  it  certain  that  if  he  would 


300  SPEECHES   OF   HENEY   CLAY. 

not  bargain  with  General  Jackson,  it  could  only  be  because  he 
had  bargained  with  Mr.  Adams.  Hence  the  charge  against  Mr. 
Clay,  without  the  slightest  evidence  to  support  it.  It  seemed 
morally  impossible  that  General  Jackson  and  his  friends  should 
appreciate  the  lofty  ground  occupied  by  Mr.  Clay,  as  conceded  to 
him  by  the  country  and  by  all  parties,  rendering  it  entirely  un- 
necessary for  him  to  have  any  understanding  with  any  party,  as 
to  what  place  he  should  occupy  in  the  government.  The  only 
question  was,  as  to  what  party  he  might  incline  to  favor.  It 
was  impossible  that  his  sympathies,  or  his  sense  of  duty  to  the 
country,  should  run  on  the  side  of  General  Jackson,  as  his  sjjeech 
on  the  Seminole  War,  before  given,  will  show.  Mr.  Clay's  opin- 
ion of  General  Jackson  corresponded  with  that  of  Mr.  Jefferson, 
which  has  lately  come  to  light  in  the  publication  of  the  private 
correspondence  of  Daniel  Webster,  as  having  been  uttered  by 
Mr.  Jefferson  in  1824,  when  General  Jackson  was  first  run  for 
the  Presidency  :  "  I  feel  much  alarmed,"  said  Mr.  Jefferson  to. 
Mr.  Webster,  "  at  the  prospect  of  seeing  General  Jackson  presi- 
dent. He  is  one  of  the  most  unfit  men  I  know  of  for  such  a 
place.  He  has  had  very  little  respect  for  laws  or  constitutions, 
though  an  able  military  chief.  His  passions  are  terrible.  When 
I  was  President  of  the  Senate,  he  was  a  senator  ;  and  he  could 
never  speak  on  account  of  the  rashness  of  his  feelings.  I  have 
seen  him  attempt  it  repeatedly,  and  as  often  choke  with  rage. 
His  passions  are,  no  doubt,  cooler  now  ;  for  he  has  been  much 
tried  since  I  knew  him.     But  he  is  a  dangerous  man." 

This  is  recorded  by  Mr.  Webster  as  having  been  uttered  by  Mr. 
Jefferson  in  private  conversation,  when  Mr.  Webster  was  a  guest 
at  Monticello,  and  it  is  no  doubt  true.  Mr.  Clay  had  like  rea- 
sons for  believing  General  Jackson  to  be  a  dangerous  man,  and 
he  conscientiously  entertained  them.  Hence  his  preference  of 
Mr.  Adams,  and  hence  the  violent  persecution  of  Mr.  Clay  on 
account  of  this  preference,  which  is  fully  set  forth  in  the  chapters 
entitled  "The  Great  Conspiracy,"  in  the  first  volume  of  this 
work,  and  which  is  also  briefly  illustrated  in  the  following  ad- 
dress.] 

The  relations  of  your  representative  and  of  your  neighbor,  in  which  I 
have  so  long  stood,  and  in  which  I  have  experienced  so  many  strong 
proofs  of  your  confidence,  attachment,  and  friendship,  having  just  been, 
the  one  terminated,  and  the  other  suspended,  I  avail  myself  of  the  occasion 
on  taking,  I  hope  a  temporary,  leave  of  you,  to  express  my  unfeigned 
gratitude  for  all  your  favors,  and  to  assure  you  that  I  shall  cherish  a  fond 


MR.    CLAY'S   ADDEESS   TO    HIS   CONSTITUENTS.  301 

and  unceasing  recollection  of  them.  The  extraordinary  circumstances  in 
which,  during  the  late  session  of  Congress,  I  have  been  placed,  and  the  un- 
merited animadversions  which  I  have  brought  upon  myself,  for  an  honest 
and  faithful  discharge  of  my  public  duty,  form  an  additional  motive  for 
this  appeal  to  your  candor  and  justice.  If,  in  the  office  which  T  have  just 
left,  I  have  abused  your  confidence  and  betrayed  your  interests,  I  can  not 
deserve  your  support  in  that  on  the  duties  of  which  I  have  now  entered. 
On  the  contrary,  should  it  appear  that  I  have  been  assailed  without  just 
cause,  and  that  misguided  zeal  and  interested  passions  have  singled  me 
out  as  a  victim,  I  can  not  doubt  that  I  shall  continue  to  find,  in  the  en- 
lightened tribunal  of  the  public,  that,  cheering  countenance  and  impartial 
judgment,  without  wdiich  a  public  servant  can  not  possibly  discharge  with 
advantage  the  trust  confided  to  him. 

It  is  known  to  you,  that  my  name  has  been  presented,  by  the  respectable 
States  of  Ohio,  Kentucky,  Louisiana,  and  Missouri,  for  the  office  of  presi- 
dent, to  the  consideration  of  the  American  public,  and  that  it  had  attracted 
some  attention  in  other  quarters  of  the  Union.  When,  early  in  November 
last,  I  took  my  departure  from  the  District  to  repair  to  this  city,  the  issue 
of  the  presidential  election  before  the  people  was  unknown.  Events,  how- 
ever, had  then  so  far  transpired  as  to  render  it  highly  probable  that  there 
would  be  no  election  by  the  people,  and  that  I  should  be  excluded  from 
the  House  of  Representatives.  It  became,  therefore,  my  duty  to  consider, 
and  to  make  up  an  opinion  on,  the  respective  pretensions  of  the  three 
gentlemen  who  might  be  returned,  and  at  that  early  period  I  stated  to  Dr. 
Drake,  one  of  the  professors  in  the  Medical  School  of  Transylvania  Uni- 
versity, and  to  John  J.  Crittenden,  Esquire,  of  Frankfort,  my  determination 
to  support  Mr.  Adams  in  preference  to  General  Jackson.  I  wrote  to  Charles 
Hammond,  Esquire,  of  Cincinnati,  about  the  same  time,  and  mentioned 
certain  objections  to  the  election  of  Mr.  Crawford  (among  which  was  that 
of  his  continued  ill  health),  that  appeared  to  me  almost  insuperable.  Dur- 
ing my  journey  hither,  and  up  to  near  Christmas,  it  remained  uncertain 
whether  Mr.  Crawford  or  myself  would  be  returned,  to  the  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives. Up  to  near  Christmas,  all  our  information  made  it  highly 
probable  that  the  vote  of  Louisiana  would  be  given  to  me,  and  that  I 
should  consequently  be  returned,  to  the  exclusion  of  Mr.  Crawford.  And 
while  that  probability  was  strong,  I  communicated  to  Mr.  Senator  John- 
ston, from  Louisiana,  my  resolution  not  to  allow  my  name,  in  consequence 
of  the  small  number  of  votes  by  which  it  would  be  carried  into  the  House, 
if  I  were  returneJ,  to  constitute  an  obstacle,  for  one  moment,  to  an  election 
in  the  House  of  Representatives. 

During  the  month  of  December,  and  the  greater  part  of  January,  strong 
professions  of  high  consideration,  and  of  unbounded  admiration  of  me,  were 
made  to  ray  friends,  in  the  greatest  profusion,  by  some  of  the  active  friends 
of  all  the  returned  candidates.  Every  body  professed  to  regret,  after 
I  was  excluded  from  the  House,  that  I  had  not  been   returned  to  it.     I 


302  SPEECHES   OF    HENEY   CLAY. 

seemed  to  be  the  favorite  of  every  body.  Describing  ray  situation  to  a 
distant  friend,  I  said  to  him,  "  I  am  enjoying,  while  alive,  the  posthumous 
honors  which  are  usually  awarded  to  the  venerated  dead."  A  persou  not 
acquainted  with  human  nature  would  have  been  surprised,  in  listening  to 
these  praises,  that  the  object  of  them  had  not  been  elected  by  general  ac- 
clamation. None  made  more  or  warmer  manifestations  of  these  sentiments 
of  esteem  and  admiration  than  some  of  the  friends  of  General  Jackson. 
None  were  so  reserved  as  those  of  Mr.  Adams — under  an  opinion  (as  I  have 
learned  since  the  election),  which  they  early  imbibed,  that  the  western 
vote  would  be  only  influenced  by  its  own  sense  of  public  duty,  and  that  if 
its  judgment  pointed  to  any  other  than  Mr.  Adams,  nothing  which  they 
could  do  would  secure  it  to  him.  These  professions  and  manifestations 
were  taken  by  me  for  what  they  were  worth.  I  knew  that  the  sunbeams 
would  quickly  disappear,  after  my  opinion  should  be  ascertained,  and  that 
they  would  be  succeeded  by  a  storm ;  although  I  did  not  foresee  exactly 
how  it  would  burst  upon  my  poor  head.  I  found  myself  transformed  from 
a  candidate  before  the  people,  into  an  elector  for  the  people.  I  deliberate- 
ly examined  the  duties  incident  to  this  new  attitude,  and  weighed  all  the 
facts  before  me,  upon  which  my  judgment  was  to  be  formed  or  reviewed. 
If  the  eagerness  of  any  of  the  heated  partisans  of  the  respective  candidates 
suggested  a  tardiness  in  the  declaration  of  my  intention,  I  believed  that 
the  new  relation  in  which  I  was  placed  to  the  subject,  imposed  on  me  an 
obligation  to  pay  some  respect  to  delicacy  and  decorum. 

Meanwhile,  that  very  reserve  supplied  aliment  to  newspaper  criticism. 
The  critics  could  not  comprehend  how  a  man  standing  as  I  had  stood 
toward  the  other  gentlemen,  should  be  restrained,  by  a  sense  of  propriety, 
from  instantly  fighting  under  the  banners  of  one  of  them,  against  the 
others.  Letters  were  issued  from  the  manufactory  at  Washington,  to  come 
back,  after  performing  long  journeys,  for  Washington  consumption.  These 
letters  imputed  to  "  Mr.  Clay  and  his  friends  a  mysterious,  a  portentous 
silence,"  aud  so  forth.  From  dark  and  distant  hints  the  progress  was  easy 
to  open  and  bitter  denunciation.  Anonymous  letters,  full  of  menace  and 
abuse,  were  almost  daily  poured  in  on  me.  Personal  threats  were  com- 
municated to  me,  through  friendly  organs,  and  I  was  kindly  apprized  of  all 
the  glories  of  village  effigies  which  awaited  me.  A  systematic  attack  was 
simultaneously  commenced  upon  me  from  Boston  to  Charleston,  with  an 
object,  present  aud  future,  which  it  was  impossible  to  mistake.  No  man 
but  myself  could  know  the  nature,  extent,  and  variety,  of  means  which 
were  employed  to  awe  and  influence  me.  I  bore  them,  I  trust,  as  your  rep- 
resentative ought  to  have  borne  them,  and  as  became  me.  Then  followed 
the  letter,  afterward  adopted  as  his  own,  by  Mr.  Kremer,  to  the  Colum- 
bian Observer.  With  its  character  and  contents  you  are  well  acquainted. 
When  I  saw  that  letter,  alleged  to  be  written  by  a  member  of  the  very 
House  over  which  I  was  presiding,  who  was  so  far  designated  as  to  be 
described  as  belonging  to  a  particular  delegation  by  name,  a  member  with 


MR.    CLAY'S   ADDRESS   TO    HIS    CONSTITUENTS.  303 

whom  I  might  be  daily  exchanging,  at  least  on  my  part,  friendly  saluta- 
tions, and  he  was  possibly  receiving  from  me  constantly  acts  of  courtesy 
and  kindness,  I  felt  that  I  could  no  longer  remain  silent.  A  crisis  appeared 
to  me  to  have  arisen  in  my  public  life.  I  issued  my  card.  I  ought  not  to 
have  put  in  it  the  last  paragraph,  because,  although  it  does  not  necessarily 
imply  the  resort  to  a  personal  combat,  it  admits  of  that  construction ;  nor 
will  I  conceal  that  such  a  possible  issue  was  within  my  contemplation.  I 
owe  it  to  the  community  to  say,  that  whatever  heretofore  I  may  have  done, 
or,  by  inevitable  circumstances,  might  be  forced  to  do,  no  man  in  it  holds 
in  deeper  abhorrence  than  I  do,  that  pernicious  practice.  Condemned 
as  it  must  be  by  the  judgment  and  philosophy,  to  say  nothing  of  the 
religion,  of  every  thinking  man,  it  is  an  affair  of  feeling  about  which 
we  can  not,  although  we  should,  reason.  Its  true  corrective  will  be 
found  when  all  shall  unite,  as  all  ought  to  unite,  in  its  unqualified  pro- 
scription. 

A  few  days  after  the  publication  of  my  card,  "  another  card,"  under  Mr. 
Kremer's  name,  was  published  in  the  Intelligencer.  The  night  before,  as  I 
was  voluntarily  informed,  Mr.  Eaton,  a  senator  from  Tennessee,  and  the 
biographer  of  General  Jackson  (who  boarded  in  the  end  of  this  city,  op- 
posite to  that  in  which  Mr.  Kremer  took  up  his  abode,  a  distance  of  about 
two  miles  and  a  half),  was  closeted  for  some  time  with  him.  Mr.  Kremer 
is  entitled  to  sreat  credit  for  having  overcome  all  the  disadvantages  inci- 
dent  to  his  early  life  and  want  of  education,  and  forced  his  way  to  the 
honorable  station  of  a  member  of  the  House  of  Representatives.  Ardent 
iu  his  attachment  to  the  cause  which  he  had  espoused,  General  Jackson  is 
his  idol,  and  of  his  blind  zeal  others  have  availed  themselves,  and  have 
made  him  their  dupe  and  their  instrument.  I  do  not  pretend  to  know  the 
object  of  Mr.  Eaton's  visit  to  him.  I  state  the  fact  as  it  was  communi- 
cated to  me,  and  leave  you  to  judge.  Mr.  Kremer's  card  is  composed  with 
some  care  and  no  little  art,  and  he  is  made  to  avow  in  it,  though  some- 
what equivocally,  that  he  is  the  author  of  the  letter  to  the  Columbian 
Observer.  To  Mr.  Crowninshield,  a  member  from  Massachusetts,  formerly 
Secretary  of  the  Navy,  he  declared  that  he  was  not  the  author  of  that  let- 
ter. In  his  card  he  draws  a  clear  line  of  separation  between  my  friends 
and  me,  acquitting  them,  and  undertaking  to  make  good  his  charges  in 
that  letter  only  so  far  as  I  am  concerned.  The  purpose  of  this  discrimina- 
tion is  obvious.  At  that  time  the  election  was  undecided,  and  it  was 
therefore  as  important  to  abstain  from  imputations  against  my  friends,  as 
it  was  politic  to  fix  them  upon  me.  If  they  could  be  made  to  believe  that 
I  had  been  perfidious,  in  the  transport  of  their  indignation,  they  might 
have  been  carried  to  the  support  of  General  Jackson.  I  received  the 
National  Intelligencer,  containing  Mr.  Kremer's  card,  at  breakfast  (the 
usual  time  of  its  distribution),  on  the  morning  of  its  publication.  As  soon 
as  I  read  the  card  I  took  my  resolution.  The  terms  of  it  clearly  implied 
that  it  had  not  entered  into  his  conception  to  have  a  personal  affair  with 


304  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

me  ;  and  I  should  have  justly  exposed  myself  to  universal  ridicule  if  I  had 
sought  one  with  him.  I  determined  to  lay  the  matter  before  the  House, 
and  respectfully  invite  an  investigation  of  my  conduct.  I  accordingly  made 
a  communication  to  the  House  on  the  same  day,  the  motives  for  which  I 
assigned.  Mr.  Kremer  was  in  his  place,  and,  when  I  sat  down,  rose  and 
stated  that  he  was  prepared  and  willing  to  substantiate  his  charges  against 
me.  This  was  his  voluntary  declaration,  unprompted  by  his  aiders  and 
abettors,  who  had  no  opportunity  of  previous  consultation  with  him  on  that 
point.  Here  was  an  issue  publicly  and  solemnly  joined,  in  which  the  ac- 
cused invoked  an  inquiry  into  serious  charges  against  him,  and  the  accuser 
professed  an  ability  and  a  willingness  to  establish  them.  A  debate  ensued 
on  the  next  day  which  occupied  the  greater  part  of  it,  during  which  Mr. 
Kremer  declared  to  Mr.  Brent,  of  Louisiana,  a  friend  of  mine,  and  to  Mr. 
Little,  of  Maryland,  a  friend  of  General  Jackson,  as  they  have  certified, 
"  that  he  never  intended  to  charge  Mr.  Clay  with  corruption  or  dishonor, 
in  his  intended  vote  for  Mr.  Adams  as  president,  or  that  he  had  transferred 
or  could  transfer  the  votes  or  interests  of  his  friends ;  that  he  (Mr.  Kre- 
mer) was  among  the  last  men  in  the  nation  to  make  such  a  charge  against 
Mr.  Clay ;  and  that  his  letter  was  never  intended  to  convey  the  idea  given 
to  it."  Mr.  Digges,  a  highly  respectable  inhabitant  of  this  city,  has  cer- 
tified to  the  same  declarations  of  Mr.  Kremer. 

A  message  was  also  conveyed  to  me,  during  the  discussion,  through  a 
member  of  the  House,  to  ascertain  if  I  would  be  satisfied  with  an  explana- 
tion which  was  put  on  paper  and  shown  me,  and  which  it  was  stated  Mr 
Kremer  was  willing,  in  his  place,  to  make.  I  replied  that  the  matter  was 
in  the  possession  of  the  House.  I  was  afterward  told  that  Mr.  Ingham,  of 
Pennsylvania,  got  hold  of  that  paper,  put  it  in  his  pocket,  and  that  he  ad- 
vtsed  Mr.  Kremer  to  take  no  step  without  the  approbation  of  his  friends. 
Mr.  Cook,  of  Illinois,  moved  an  adjournment  of  the  House  on  information 
which  he  received  of  the  probability  of  Mr.  Kremer's  making  a  satisfactory 
atonement  on  the  next  day,  for  the  injury  which  he  had  done  me,  which  I 
have  no  doubt  he  would  have  made  if  he  had  been  left  to  the  impulses  of 
his  native  honesty.  The  House  decided  to  refer  my  communication  to  a 
committee,  and  adjourned  until  the  next  day  to  appoint  it  by  ballot.  In 
the  mean  time  Mr.  Kremer  had  taken,  I  presume,  or  rather  there  had  been 
forced  upon  him  the  advice  of  his  friends,  and  I  heard  no  more  of  the  apol- 
ogy. A  committee  was  appointed  of  seven  gentlemen,  of  whom  not  one  was 
my  political  friend,  but  who  were  among  the  most  eminent  members  of 
the  body.  I  received  no  summons  or  notification  from  the  committee 
from  its  first  organization  to  its  final  dissolution,  but  Mr.  Kremer  was 
called  upon  by  it  to  bring  forward  his  proofs. 

For  one  moment  be  pleased  to  stop  here  and  contemplate  his  posture, 
his  relation  to  the  House  and  to  me,  and  the  high  obligations  under  which 
he  had  voluntarily  placed  himself.  He  was  a  member  of  one  of  the  most 
august  assemblies  upon  earth,  of  which  he  was  bound  to  defend  the  purity 


MK.    CLAY'S   ADDRESS   TO    HIS    CONSTITUENTS.  305 

or  expose  the  corruption  by  every  consideration  which  ought  to  influence  a 
patriot  bosom.  A  most  responsible  and  highly  important  constitutional 
duty  was  to  be  performed  by  that  assembly.  He  had  chosen,  in  an  anony- 
mous letter,  to  bring  against  its  presiding  officer  charges,  in  respect  to  that 
duty,  of  the  most  flagitious  character.  These  charges  comprehend  delega- 
tions from  several  highly  respectable  States.  If  true,  that  presiding  officer 
merited  not  merely  to  be  dragged  from  the  chair,  but  to  be  expelled  the 
House.  He  challenges  an  investigation  into  his  conduct,  and  Mr.  Kremer 
boldly  accepts  the  challenge,  and  promises  to  sustain  his  accusation.  The 
committee  appointed  by  the  House  itself,  with  the  common  consent  of 
both  parties,  calls  upon  Mr.  Kremer  to  execute  his  pledge  publicly  given, 
in  his  proper  place,  and  also  previously  given  in  the  public  prints.  Here 
is  the  theater  of  the  alleged  arrangements;  this  the  vicinage  in  which  the 
trial  ought  to  take  place.  Every  thing  was  here  fresh  in  the  recollection 
of  the  witnesses,  if  there  were  any.  Here  all  the  proofs  were  concentrated, 
Mr.  Kremer  was  stimulated  by  every  motive  which  could  impel  to  action ; 
by  his  consistency  of  character ;  by  duty  to  his  constituents,  to  his  coun- 
try ;  by  that  of  redeeming  his  solemn  pledge ;  by  his  anxious  wish  for  the 
success  of  his  favorite,  whose  interests  could  not  fail  to  be  advanced  by 
supporting  his  atrocious  charges.  But  Mr.  Kremer  had  now  the  benefit  of 
the  advice  of  his  friends.  He  had  no  proofs,  for  the  plainest  of  all  reasons, 
because  there  was  no  truth  in  his  charges.  They  saw  that  to  attempt  to 
establish  them  and  to  fail,  as  he  must  fail  in  the  attempt,  might  lead  to  an 
exposure  of  the  conspiracy,  of  which  he  was  the  organ.  They  advised, 
therefore,  that  he  should  make  a  retreat,  and  their  adroitness  suggested, 
that  in  an  objection  to  that  jurisdiction  of  the  House,  which  had  been  ad- 
mitted, and  in  the  popular  topics  of  the  freedom  of  the  press,  his  duty  to 
his  constituents,  and  the  inequality  in  the  condition  of  the  Speaker  of  the 
House,  and  a  member  on  the  floor,  plausible  means  might  be  found  to  de- 
ceive the  ignorant  and  conceal  his  disgrace.  A  labored  communication 
was  accordingly  prepared  by  them,  in  Mr.  Kremer's  name,  and  transmitted 
to  the  committee,  founded  upon  these  suggestions.  Thus  the  valiant 
champion,  w7ho  had  boldly  stepped  forward,  and  promised,  as  a  represent- 
ative of  the  people,  to  "  cry  aloud  and  spare  not,"  forgot  all  his  gratuitous 
gallantry  and  boasted  patriotism,  and  sank  at  once  into  profound  silence. 

With  these  remarks,  I  will  for  the  present  leave  him,  and  proceed  to 
assign  the  reasons  to  you,  to  whom  alone  I  admit  myself  to  be  officially 
responsible  for  the  vote  which  I  gave  on  the  presidential  election.  The 
first  inquiry  which  it  behooved  me  to  make  was,  as  to  the  influence  which 
ought  to  be  exerted  on  my  judgment,  by  the  relative  state  of  the  electoral 
votes  which  the  three  returned  candidates  brought  into  the  House  from  the 
colleges.  General  Jackson  obtained  ninety-nine,  Mr.  Adams  eighty-four, 
and  Mr.  Crawford  forty-one.  Ought  the  fact  of  a  plurality  being  given  to 
one  of  the  candidates  to  have  any,  and  what,  weight  1  If  the  Constitution 
had  intended  that  it  should  have  been  decisive,  the  Constitution  would  have 

20 


306  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

made  it  decisive,  aud  interdicted  the  exercise  of  any  discretion  on  the  part 
of  the  House  of  Representatives.  The  Constitution  has  not  so  ordained, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  it  has  provided,  that  "from  the  persons  having  the 
highest  numbers,  not  exceeding  three,  on  the  list  of  those  voted  for  as 
president,  the  House  of  Representatives  shall  choose,  immediately,  by  ballot, 
a  president."  Thus  a  discretion  is  necessarily  invested  in  the  House ;  for 
choice  implies  examination,  comparison,  judgment.  The  fact,  therefore, 
that  one  of  the  three  persons  was  the  highest  returned,  not  being,  by  the 
Constitution  of  the  country,  conclusive  upon  the  judgment  of  the  House, 
it  still  remains  to  determine  what  is  the  true  degree  of  weight  belonging  to 
it  ?  It  has  been  contended  that  it  should  operate,  if  not  as  au  instruction, 
at  least  in  the  nature  of  one,  and  that  in  this  form  it  should  control  the 
judgment  of  the  House.  But  this  is  the  same  argument  of  conclusiveness 
which  the  Constitution  does  not  enjoin,  thrown  into  a  different  but  more 
imposing  shape.  Let  me  analyze  it.  There  are  certain  States,  the  aggre- 
gate of  whose  electoral  votes  conferred  upon  the  highest  returned  candi- 
date, indicate  their  wish  that  he  should  be  the  president.  Their  votes 
amount  in  number  to  ninety-nine,  out  of  two  hundred  and  sixty-one  elec- 
toral votes  of  the  whole  Union.  These  ninety-nine  do  not,  and  cau  not, 
of  themselves,  make  the  president.  If  the  fact  of  particular  States  giving 
ninety-nine  votes,  can,  according  to  any  received  notions  of  the  doc- 
trine of  instruction,  be  regarded  in  that  light,  to  whom  are  those  instruc- 
tions to  be  considered  addressed  ?  According  to  that  doctrine,  the  people 
who  appoint,  have  the  right  to  direct,  by  their  instruction,  in  certain  cases, 
the  course  of  the  representative  whom  they  appoint.  The  States,  there- 
fore, who  gave  those  ninety-nine  votes,  may  in  some  sense  be  understood 
thereby  to  have  instructed  their  representatives  in  the  House  to  vote  for 
the  person  on  whom  they  were  bestowed,  in  the  choice  of  a  president 
But  most  clearly  the  representatives  coming  from  other  States,  which  gave 
no  part  of  those  ninety-nine  votes,  cau  not  be  considered  as  having  been 
under  any  obligation  to  surrender  their  judgments  to  those  of  the  States 
which  gave  the  ninety-nine  votes.  To  contend  that  they  are  under  such 
an  obligation,  would  be  to  maintain  that  the  people  of  one  State  have 
a  right  to  instruct  the  representatives  from  another  State.  It  would  be  to 
maintain  a  still  more  absurd  proposition  ;  that  in  a  case  where  the  representa- 
tives from  a  State  did  not  hold  themselves  instructed  and  bound  by  the 
will  of  that  State,  as  indicated  in  its  electoral  college,  the  representatives 
from  another  State  were,  nevertheless,  instructed  and  bound  by  that  alien 
will.  Thus  the  entire  vote  of  North  Carolina,  and  a  large  majority  of  that 
of  Maryland,  in  their  respective  electoral  colleges,  were  given  to  one  of  the 
three  returned  candidates,  for  whom  the  delegation  from  neither  of  those 
States  voted.  And  yet  the  argument  combated  requires  that  the  delega- 
tion from  Kentucky,  who  do  not  represent  the  people  from  North  Carolina 
nor  Maryland,  should  be  instructed  by,  and  give  an  effect  to,  the  indicated 
will  of  the  people  of  those  two  States,  when  their  own  delegation  paid  no 


ME.   CLAY'S   ADDRESS   TO   HIS   CONSTITUENTS.  307 

attention  to  it.  Doubtless,  those  delegations  felt  themselvns  authorized  to 
look  into  the  actual  composition  of,  and  all  other  circumstances  connected 
with,  the  majorities  which  gave  the  electoral  votes  in  their  respective 
States;  and  felt  themselves  justified,  from  a  view  of  the  whole  ground,  to 
act  upon  their  responsibility,  and  according  to  their  best  judgments,  dis- 
regarding the  electoral  votes  in  their  States.  And  are  representatives  from 
a  different  State  not  only  bound  by  the  will  of  a  people  of  the  different 
commonwealth,  but  forbidden  to  examine  into  the  manner  by  which  the 
expression  of  that  will  was  brought  about — an  examination  which  the  im- 
mediate representatives  themselves  feel  it  their  duty  to  make  ? 

Is  the  fact,  then,  of  a  plurality  to  have  no  weight  ?  Far  from  it.  Here 
are  twenty-four  communities  united  under  a  common  government.  The 
expression  of  the  will  of  any  one  of  them  is  entitled  to  the  most  respect- 
ful attention.  It  ought  to  be  patiently  heard  and  kindly  regarded  by  the 
others  ;  but  it  can  not  be  admitted  to  be  conclusive  upon  them.  The  ex- 
pression of  the  will  of  ninety-nine  out  of  two  hundred  and  sixty-one  elect- 
ors, is  entitled  to  very  great  attention,  but  that  will  can  not  be  considered 
as  entitled  to  control  the  will  of  one  hundred  and  sixty-two  electors  who 
have  manifested  a  different  will.  To  give  it  such  controlling  influence, 
would  be  a  subversion  of  the  fundamental  maxim  of  the  republic — that  the 
majority  should  govern.  The  will  of  the  ninety-nine  can  neither  be  allow- 
ed rightfully  to  control  the  remaining  one  hundred  and  sixty-two,  nor  any 
one  of  the  one  hundred  and  sixty- two  electoral  votes.  It  may  be  an  argu- 
ment, a  persuasion,  addressed  to  all  and  each  of  them,  but  it  is  binding 
and  obligatory  upon  none.  It  follows,  then,  that  the  fact  of  a  plurality  was 
only  one  amoug  the  various  considerations  which  the  House  was  called 
upon  to  weigh,  in  making  up  its  judgment.  And  the  weight  of  the  con- 
sideration ought  to  have  been  regulated  by  the  extent  of  the  plurality. 
As  between  General  Jackson  and  Mr.  Adams,  the  vote  standing  in  the 
proportions  of  ninety-nine  to  eighty-four,  it  was  entitled  to  less  weight ; 
as  between  the  general  and  Mr.  Crawford,  it  was  entitled  to  more,  the 
vote  being  as  ninety-niue  to  forty-one.  The  concession  may  even  be 
made  that,  upon  the  supposition  of  an  equality  of  pretensions  between  com- 
peting candidates,  the  preponderance  ought  to  be  given  to  the  fact  of  a 
plurality. 

With  these  views  of  the  relative  state  of  the  vote  with  which  the  three 
returned  candidates  entered  the  House,  I  proceeded  to  examine  the  other 
considerations  which  belonged  to  the  question.  For  Mr.  Crawford,  who 
barely  entered  the  House,  with  only  four  votes  more  than  one  candidate 
not  returned,  and  upon  whose  case,  therefore,  the  argument  derived  from 
the  fact  of  plurality  operated  with  strong,  though  not  decisive  force,  I  have 
ever  felt  much  personal  regard.  But  I  was  called  upon  to  perform  a 
solemn  public  duty,  in  which  my  private  feelings,  whether  of  affection  or 
aversion,  were  not  to  be  indulged,  but  the  good  of  my  country  only  con- 
sulted.    It  appeared  to  me  that  the  precarious  state  of  that  gentleman^ 


308  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

health,  although  I  participated  with  his  hest  friends  in  all  their  regrets  and 
sympathies  on  account  of  it,  was  conclusive  against  him,  to  say  nothing  of 
other  considerations  of  a  public  nature,  which  would  have  deserved  exam- 
ination if,  happily,  in  that  respect  he  had  been  differently  circumstanced. 
He  had  been  ill  near  eighteen  months  ;  and,  although  I  am  aware  that  his 
actual  condition  was  a  fact  depending  upon  evidence,  and  that  the  evidence 
in  regard  to  it,  which  had  been  presented  to  the  public,  was  not  perfectly 
harmonious,  I  judged  for  myself  upon  what  I,  saw  and  heard.  He  may, 
and  I  ardently  hope  will,  recover ;  but  I  did  not  think  it  became  me  to 
assist  in  committing  the  executive  administration  of  this  great  republic,  on 
the  doubtful  contingency  of  the  restoration  to  health  of  a  gentleman  who 
had  been  so  long  and  so  seriously  afflicted.  Moreover,  if,  under  all  the 
circumstances  of  his  situation,  his  election  had  been  desirable,  I  did  not 
think  it  practicable.  I  believed,  and  yet  believe,  that  if  the  votes  of  the 
western  States,  given  to  Mr.  Adams,  had  been  conferred  on  Mr.  Crawford, 
the  effect  would  have  been  to  protract  in  the  House  the  decision  of  the 
contest,  to  the  great  agitation  and  distraction  of  the  country,  and  possibly 
to  defeat  an  election  altogether ;  the  very  worst  result  I  thought  that  could 
happen.  It  appeared  to  me,  then,  that,  sooner  or  later,  we  must  arrive  at 
the  only  practical  issue  of  the  contest  before  us,  and  that  was  between  Mr. 
Adams  and  General  Jackson,  and  I  thought  that  the  earlier  we  got  there, 
the  better  for  the  country,  and  for  the  House. 

In  considering  this  only  alternative,  I  was  not  unaware  of  your  strong 
desire  to  have  a  western  president ;  but  I  thought  that  I  knew  enough  of 
your  patriotism  and  magnanimity,  displayed  on  so  many  occasions,  to  be- 
lieve that  you  could  rise  above  the  mere  gratification  of  sectioual  pride,  if 
the  common  good  of  the  whole  required  you  to  make  the  sacrifice  of  local 
partiality.  I  solemnly  believed  it  did,  and  this  brings  me  to  the  most  im- 
portant consideration  which  belonged  to  the  whole  subject — that  arising 
out  of  the  respective  fitness  of  the  only  two  real  competitors,  as  it  appeared 
to  my  best  judgment. 

In  speakiug  of  General  Jackson,  I  am  aware  of  the  delicacy  and  respect 
which  are  justly  due  to  that  distinguished  citizen.  It  is  far  from  my  pur- 
pose to  attempt  to  disparage  him.  I  could  not  do  it  if  I  were  capable  of 
making  the  attempt ;  but  I  shall  nevertheless  speak  of  him  as  becomes 
me  with  truth.  I  did  not  believe  him  so  competent  to  discharge  the  va- 
rious, intricate,  and  complex  duties  of  the  office  of  chief  magistrate,  as  his 
competitor.  He  has  displayed  great  skill  and  bravery,  as  a  military  com- 
mander, and  his  own  renown  will  endure  as  long  as  the  means  exist  of 
preserving  a  recollection  of  human  transactions.  But  to  be  qualified  to 
discharge  the  duties  of  President  of  the  United  States,  the  incumbent 
must  have  more  than  mere  military  attainments — he  must  be  a  statesman. 
An  individual  may  be  a  gallant  and  successful  general,  an  eminent  law- 
yer, an  eloquent  divine,  a  learned  physician,  or  an  accomplished  artist ; 
and  doubtless  the  union  of  all  these  characters  in  the  person  of  a  chief 


MR.    CLAY'S   ADDRESS   TO   HIS   CONSTITUENTS.  309 

magistrate  would  be  desirable,  but  no  one  of  them,  nor  all  combined,  will 
qualify  him  to   be  president,  unless  he   superadds  that  indispensable  re- 
quisite of  being  a  statesman.     Far  from  meaning  to  say  that  it  is  an  ob- 
jection to  the  elevation   to  the  chief  magistracy  of  any  person  that  he  is 
a  military  commander,  if  he  unites  the  other  qualifications,  I  only  intend 
to  say  that   whatever  may  be    the    success  or   splendor  of  his  military 
achievements,  if  his  qualifications  be  only  military,  that  is  an  objection, 
and  I  think  a  decisive  objection,  to  his  election.     If  General  Jackson  has 
exhibited,  either  in  the  councils  of  the  Union,  or  in  tbose  of  his  own  State, 
or  in  those  of  any  other  State  or  Territory,  the  qualities  of  a  statesman, 
the  evidence  of  the  fact  has  escaped  my  observation.     It  would  be  as  pain- 
ful as  it  is  unnecessary,  to  recapitulate  some  of  the  incidents,  which  must 
be  fresh  in  your  recollection,  of  his  public  life.     But  I  was  greatly  deceived 
in  my  judgment  if  they  proved  him  to  be  endowed  with   that  prudence, 
temper,  and  discretion,  which  are  necessary  for  civil   administration.     It 
was  in  vain  to  remind  me  of  the  illustrious  example  of  Washington.     There 
was  ih  that  extraordinary  person   united,  a  serenity  of  mind,  a   cool   and 
collected  wisdom,  a  cautious  and  deliberate  judgment,  a  perfect  command 
of  the  passions,  and  throughout  his  whole  life,  a  familiarity  and  acquaint- 
ance with  business,  and   civil  transactions,  which  rarely  characterize  any 
human  being.     No  man  was  ever  more  deeply  penetrated  than  he  was, 
with  profound  respect  for  the  safe  and  necessary  principle  of  the   entire 
subordination  of  the  military  to  the  civil  authority.     I  hope  I  do  no  in- 
justice to  General  Jackson  when  I  say  that  I  could  not   recognize  in  his 
public  conduct  those  attainments,  for  both  civil  government  and  military 
command,  which  cotemporaries  and  posterity  have  alike  unanimously  con- 
curred in  awarding  as  yet  only  to  the  father  of  his  country.     I  was  sensible 
of  the  gratitude  which  the  people  of  this  country  justly  feel  toward  Gen- 
eral Jackson,  for  his  brilliant  military  services.     But  the  impulses  of  public 
gratitude  should  be  controlled,  as  it  appeared  to  me,  by  reason  and  dis- 
cretion, and  I  was  not  prepared  blindly  to  surrender  myself  to  the  hazard- 
ous indulgence   of  a  feeling,  however  amiable   and  excellent  that  feeling 
may  be,  when  properly  directed.     It  did  not  seem  to  me  to  be  wise  or 
prudent,  if,  as   I  solemnly  believe,  General  Jackson's  competency  for  the 
office  was  highly  questionable,  that  he  should  be  placed  in  a  situation 
where  neither  his  fame  nor  the  public  interests  would  be  advanced.     Gen- 
eral Jackson  himself  would  be  the  last  man  to  recommend  or  vote  for 
any  one  for  a  place  for  which  he  thought  him  unfit.     I  felt  myself  sus- 
tained by  his  own  reasoning,  in  his  letter  to  Mr.  Monroe,  in  which,  speak- 
ing of  the  qualifications  of  our  venerable  Shelby  for  the  Department  of 
War,  he  remarked  :  "I  am  compelled  to  say  to  you,  that  the  acquirements 
of  this  worthy  man  are  not  competent  to  the  discharge  of  the  multiplied 
duties  of  this  Department.     I  therefore  hope  he  may  not  accept  the  ap- 
pointment.    I  am  fearful,  if  he  does,  he  will  not  add  much  splendor  to  his 
present  well-earned  standing  as  a  public  character."     Such  was  my  opinion 


310  SPEECHES   OF   HENEY   CLAY. 

of  General  Jackson,  in  reference  to  the  presidency.  His  conviction  of 
Governor  Shelby's  unfitness,  by  the  habits  of  his  life,  for  the  appointment 
of  Secretary  of  War,  were  not  more  hones'!;  nor  stronger  than  mine  were 
of  his  own  want  of  experience,  and  the  necessary  civil  qualifications  to 
discharge  the  duties  of  a  President  of  the  United  States.  In  his  elevation 
to  this  office,  too,  I  thought  I  perceived  the  establishment  of  a  fearful  pre- 
cedent ;  and  I  am  mistaken  in  all  the  warnings  of  instructive  history,  if  I 
erred  in  my  judgment.  Undoubtedly  there  are  other  and  many  dangers 
to  public  liberty,  besides  that  which  proceeds  from  military  idolatry  ;  but 
I  have  yet  to  acquire  the  knowledge  of  it,  if  there  be  one  more  perilous- 
or  more  frequent. 

Whether  Mr.  Adams  would  or  would  not  have  been  my  choice  of  a  presi- 
dent, if  I  had  been  left  freely  to  select  from  the  whole  mass  of  American  citi- 
zens, was  not  the  question  submitted  to  my  decision.  I  had  no  such  liberty  ; 
but  I  was  circumscribed,  in  the  selection  I  had  to  make,  to  one  of  the  three 
gentlemen  whom  the  people  themselves  had  thought  proper  to  present  to 
the  House  of  Representatives.  Whatever  objections  might  be  supposed 
to  exist  against  him,  still  greater  appeared  to  me  to  apply  to  his  competitor. 
Of  Mr.  Adams  it  is  but  truth  and  justice  to  say,  that  he  is  highly  gifted, 
profoundly  learned,  and  long  and  greatly  experienced  in  public  affairs,  at 
home  and  abroad.  Intimately  conversant  with  the  rise  and  progress  of 
every  negotiation  with  foreign  powers,  pending  or  concluded  ;  personally 
acquainted  with  the  capacity  and  attainments  of  most  of  the  public  men 
of  this  country,  whom  it  might  be  proper  to  employ  in  the  public  serv- 
ice ;  extensively  possessed  of  much  of  that  valuable  kind  of  information 
which  is  to  be  acquired  neither  from  books  nor  tradition,  but  which  is  the 
fruit  of  largely  participating  in  public  affairs  ;  discreet  and  sagacious,  he 
would  enter  upon  the  duties  of  the  office  with  great  advantages.  I  saw 
in  his  election  th,e  establishment  of  no  dangerous  example.  I  saw  in  it,  on 
the  contrary,  only  conformity  to  the  safe  precedents  which  had  been  estab- 
lished in  the  instances  of  Mr.  Jefferson,  Mr.  Madison,  and  Mr.  Monroe, 
who  had  respectively  filled  the  same  office  from  which  he  was  to  be  trans- 
lated. 

A  collateral  consideration  of  much  weight,  was  derived  from  the  wishes 
of  the  Ohio  delegation.  A  majority  of  it,  during  the  progress  of  the 
session,  made  up  their  opiuions  to  support  Mr.  Adams,  and  they  were 
communicated  to  me.  They  said,  "  Ohio  supported  the  candidate  who  was 
the  choice  of  Kentucky.  We  failed  in  our  common  exertions  to  secure 
his  election.  Now,  among  those  returned,  we  have  a  decided  preference, 
and  we  think  you  ought  to  make  some  sacrifice  to  gratify  us."  Was  not 
much  due  to  our  neighbor  and  friend  ? 

I  considered,  with  the  greatest  respect,  the  resolution  of  the  General 
Assembly  of  Kentucky,  requesting  the  delegation  to  vote  for  General 
Jackson.  That  resolution,  it  is  true,  placed  us  in  a  peculiar  situation. 
While  every  other  delegation,  from  every  other  State  in  the  Union,  was 


MR.    CLAY'S   ADDRESS   TO    HIS    CONSTITUENTS.  311 

left  by  its  Legislature  entirely  free  to  examine  the  pretensions  of  all  the 
candidates,  and  to  form  its  unbiased  judgment,  the  General  Assembly  of 
Kentucky  thought  proper  to  interpose,  and  request  the  delegation  to  give 
its  vote  to  one  of  the  candidates,  whom  they  were  pleased  to  designate.  I 
felt  a  sincere  desire  to  comply  with  a  request  emanating  from  a  source  so 
respectable,  if  I  could  have  done  so  consistently  with  those  paramount 
duties  which  I  owed  to  you  and  to  the  country.  But,  after  full  and  anxious 
consideration,  I  found  it  incompatible  with  my  best  judgment  of  those 
duties,  to  conform  to  the  request  of  the  General  Assembly.  The  resolution 
asserts,  that  it  was  the  wish  of  the  people  of  Kentucky,  that  their  delega- 
tion should  vote  for  the  general.  It  did  not  inform  me  by  what  means 
that  body  had  arrived  at  a  knowledge  of  the  wish  of  the  people.  I  knew 
that  its  members  had  repaired  to  Frankfort  before  I  departed  from  home 
to  come  to  Washington.  I  knew  that  their  attention  was  fixed  on  import- 
ant local  concerns,  well  entitled,  by  their  magnitude,  exclusively  to  engross 
it.  No  election,  no  general  expression  of  the  popular  sentiment,  had  oc- 
curred since  that  in  November,  when  electors  were  chosen,  and  at  that  the 
people,  by  an  overwhelming  majority,  had  decided  against  General  Jack- 
son. I  could  not  see  how  such  an  expression  against  him  could  be  inter- 
preted into  that  of  a  desire  for  his  election.  If,  as  is  true,  the  candidate 
whom  they  preferred  was  not  returned  to  the  House,  it  is  equally  true  that 
the  state  of  the  contest,  as  it  presented  itself  here  to  me,  had  never  been 
considered,  discussed,  and  decided  by  the  people  of  Kentucky,  in  their  col- 
lective capacity.  What  would  have  been  their  decision  on  this  new  state 
of  the  question,  I  might  have  undertaken  to  conjecture,  but  the  certainty 
of  any  conclusion  of  fact,  as  to  their  opinion,  at  which  I  could  arrive,  was 
by  no  means  equal  to  that  certainty  of  conviction  of  my  duty  to  which  I 
was  carried  by  the  exertion  of  my  best  and  most  deliberate  reflections. 
The  letters  from  home,  which  some  of  the  delegation  received,  expressed 
the  most  opposite  opinions,  and  there  were  not  wanting  instances  of  letters 
from  some  of  the  very  members,  who  had  voted  for  that  resolution,  advis- 
ing a  different  course.  I  received  from  a  highly  respectable  portion  of  my 
constituents  a  paper,  instructing  me  as  follows  : 

';  We,  the  undersigned  voters  in  the  congressional  district,  having  viewed  the 
instruction  or  request  of  the  Legislature  of  Kentucky,  on  the  subject  of  choos- 
ing a  president  and  vice-president  of  the  United  States,  with  regret,  and  the 
said  request  or  instruction  to  our  representative  in  Congress  from  this  district 
being  without  our  knowledge  or  consent,  we,  for  many  reasons  known  to  our- 
selves, connected  with  so  momentous  an  occasion,  hereby  instruct  our  represent- 
ative in  Congress  to  vote  on  this  occasion  agreeably  to  his  own  judgment,  and 
the  best  lights  he  may  have  on  the  subject,  with  or  without  the  consent  of  the 
Legislature  of  Kentucky." 

This  instruction  came  both  unexpectedly  and  unsolicited  by  me,  and  it 
was  accompanied  by  letters  assuring  me  that  it  expressed  the  opinion  of 


312  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

a  majority  of  my  constituents.     I  could  not,  therefore,  regard  the  resolution 
as  conclusive  evidence  of  your  wishes. 

Viewed  as  a  mere  request,  as  it  purported  to  be,  the  General  Assembly 
doubtless  had  the  power  to  make  it.  But,  then,  with  deference,  I  think  it 
was  worthy  of  serious  consideration,  whether  the  dignity  of  the  General 
Assembly  ought  not  to  have  induced  it  to  forbear  addressing  itself,  not  to 
another  legislative  body,  but  to  a  small  part  of  it,  and  requesting  the  mem- 
bers who  composed  that  part,  in  a  case  which  the  Constitution  had  con- 
fided to  them,  to  vote  according  to  the  wishes  of  the  General  Assembly, 
whether  those  wishes  did  or  did  not  conform  to  their  sense  of  duty.  I 
could  not  regard  the  resolution  as  an  instruction ;  for,  from  the  origin  of 
our  State,  its  Legislature  has  never  assumed  or  exercised  the  right  to  in- 
struct the  representatives  in  Congress.  I  did  not  recognize  the  right, 
therefore,  of  the  Legislature,  to  instruct  me.  I  recognized  that  right  only 
when  exerted  by  you.  That  the  portion  of  the  public  servants  who  made 
up  the  General  Assembly,  have  no  right  to  instruct  that  portion  of  them 
who  constituted  the  Kentucky  delegation  in  the  House  of  Representatives, 
is  a  proposition  too  clear  to  be  argued.  The  members  of  the  General  As- 
sembly would  have  been  the  first  to  behold  as  a  presumptuous  interposi- 
tion, any  instruction,  if  the  Kentucky  delegation  could  have  committed 
the  absurdity  to  issue,  from  this  place,  any  instruction  to  them  to  vote  in 
a  particular  manner  on  any  of  the  interesting  subjects  which  lately  engaged 
their  attention  at  Frankfort.  And  although  nothing  is  further  from  my 
intention  than  to  impute  either  absurdity  or  jiresumption  to  the  General 
Assembly,  in  the  adoption  of  the  resolution  referred  to,  I  must  say,  that 
the  difference  between  an  instruction  emanating  from  them  to  the  dele- 
gation, and  from  the  delegation  to  them,  is  not  in  the  principle,  but  is  to 
be  found  only  in  the  degree  of  superior  importance  which  belongs  to  the 
General  Assembly. 

Entertaining  these  views  of  the  election  on  which  it  was  made  my  duty 
to  vote,  I  felt  myself  bound,  in  the  exercise  of  my  best  judgment,  to  prefer 
Mr.  Adams ;  and  I  accordingly  voted  for  him.  I  should  have  been  highly 
gratified  if  it  had  not  been  my  duty  to  vote  on  the  occasion ;  but  that  was 
not  my  situation,  and  I  did  not  choose  to  shrink  from  any  responsibility 
which  appertained  to  your  representative.  Shortly  after  the  election,  it 
was  rumored  that  Mr  Kremer  was  preparing  a  publication,  and  the  prepa- 
rations which  were  making  excited  much  expectation.  Accordingly,  on 
the  twenty-sixth  of  February,  the  address,  under  his  name,  to  the  "  electors 
of  the  ninth  congressional  district  of  the  State  of  Pennsylvania,"  made  its 
appearance  in  the  Washington  City  Gazette.  No  member  of  the  House  I 
am  persuaded,  believed  that  Mr.  Kremer  ever  wrote  one  paragraph  of  that 
address,  or  of  the  plea,  which  was  presented  to  the  committee,  to  the  juris- 
diction of  the  House.  Those  who  counseled  him,  and  composed  both  pa- 
pers, and  their  purposes,  were  just  as  well  known  as  the  author  of  any 
report  from  a  committee  to  the  House.     The  first  observation  which  is 


MR.    CLAY'S   ADDRESS    TO    HIS   CONSTITUENTS.  313 

called  for  by  the  address  is  the  place  of  its  publication.  That  place  was  in 
this  city,  remote  from  the  center  of  Pennsylvania,  near  which  Mr.  Kivmer's 
district  is  situated,  and  in  a  paper  having  but  a  very  limited,  if  any  circula- 
tion in  it.  The  time  is  also  remarkable.  The  fact  that  the  president  in- 
tended to  nominate  me  to  the  Senate  for  the  office  which  I  now  hold,  in 
the  course  of  a  few  days,  was  then  well  known,  and  the  publication  of  the 
address,  was,  no  doubt,  made  less  with  an  intention  to  communicate  inform- 
ation to  the  electors  of  the  ninth  congressional  district  of  Pennsylvania? 
than  to  affect  the  decision  of  the  Senate  on  the  intended  nomination.  Of 
the  character  and  contents  of  that  address  of  Messrs.  George  Kremer  & 
Co.,  made  up,  as  it  is,  of  assertion  without  proof,  of  inferences  without 
premises,  and  of  careless,  jocose,  and  quizzing  conversations  of  some  of  my 
friends,  to  which  I  was  no  party,  and  of  which  I  had  never  heard,  it  is  not 
my  intention  to  say  much.  It  carried  its  own  refutation,  and  the  parties 
concerned  saw  its  abortive  nature  the  next  day,  in  the  indignant  counte- 
nance of  every  unprejudiced  and  honorable  member.  In  his  card,  Mr. 
Kremer  has  been  made  to  say,  that  he  held  himself  ready  "  to  prove,  to 
the  satisfaction  of  unprejudiced  minds,  enough  to  satisfy  them  of  the  ac- 
curacy of  the  statements  which  are  contained  in  that  letter,  to  the  extent 
that  they  concerned  the  course  of  conduct  of  II.  Clay."  The  object  for  ex- 
cluding my  friends  from  this  pledge  has  been  noticed.  But  now  the  elec- 
tion was  decided,  and  there  no  longer  existed  a  motive  for  discrimination 
between  them  and  me.  Hence  the  only  statements  that  are  made,  in  the 
address,  having  the  semblance  of  proof,  relate  rather  to  them  than  to  me ; 
and  the  design  was,  by  establishing  something  like  facts  upon  them,  to 
make  those  facts  react  upon  me. 

Of  the  few  topics  of  the  address  upon  which  I  shall  remark,  the  first  is 
the  accusation  brought  forward  against  me,  of  violating  instructions.  If 
the  accusation  were  true,  who  was  the  party  offended,  and  to  whom  was  I 
amenable  ?  If  I  violated  any  instructions,  they  must  have  been  yours, 
since  you  only  had  the  right  to  give  them,  and  to  you  alone  was  I  respon- 
sible. Without  allowing  hardly  time  for  you  to  hear  of  my  vote,  without 
waiting  to  know  what  your  judgment  was  of  my  conduct,  George  Kremer 
&  Co.  chose  to  arraign  me  before  the  American  public  as  the  violator  of 
instructions  which  I  was  bound  to  obey.  If,  instead  of  being,  as  you  are 
and  I  hope  always  will  be,  vigilant  observers  of  the  conduct  of  your  public 
agents,  jealous  of  your  rights,  and  competent  to  protect  and  defend  them, 
you  had  been  ignorant  and  culpably  confiding,  the  gratuitous  interposition 
as  your  advocate,  of  the  honorable  George  Kremer,  of  the  ninth  congres- 
sional district  in  Pennsylvania,  would  have  merited  your  most  grateful  ac- 
knowledgments. Even  upon  that  supposition,  his  arraignment  of  me  would 
have  required  for  its  support  one  small  circumstance,  which  happens  not  to 
exist,  and  that  is,  the  fact  of  your  having  actually  instructed  me  to  vote 
according  to  his  pleasure. 

The  relations  in  which  I  stood  to  Mr.  Adams  constitute  the  next  theme 


314  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

of  the  address,  which  I  shall  notice.  I  am  described  as  having  assumed 
"  a  position  of  peculiar  and  decided  hostility  to  the  election  of  Mr.  Adams," 
and  expressions  toward  him  are  attributed  to  me,  which  I  never  used.  I 
am  also  made  responsible  for  "pamphlets  and  essays  of  great  ability,"  pub- 
lished by  my  fiieuds  in  Kentucky  in  the  course  of  the  canvass.  The  in- 
justice of  the  principle  of  holding  me  thus  answerable,  may  be  tested  by 
applying  it  to  the  case  of  General  Jackson,  in  reference  to  publications 
issued,  for  example,  from  the  Columbia  Observer.  That  I  was  not  in  favor 
of  the  election  of  Mr.  Adams,  when  the  contest  was  before  the  people,  is 
most  certain.  Neither  was  I  in  favor  of  that  of  Mr.  Crawford  or  General 
Jackson.  That  I  ever  did  any  thing  against  Mr.  Adams,  or  either  of  the 
other  gentlemen,  inconsistent  with  a  fair  and  honorable  competition,  I  ut- 
terly deny.  My  relations  to  Mr.  Adams  have  been  the  subject  of  much 
misconception,  if  not  misrepresentation.  I  have  been  stated  to  be  under  a 
public  pledge  to  expose  some  nefarious  conduct  of  that  gentleman,  during 
the  negotiation  at  Ghent,  which  would  prove  him  to  be  entirely  unworthy 
of  public  confidence ;  and  that,  with  the  knowledge  of  his  perfidy,  I  never- 
theless voted  for  him.  If  these  imputations  are  well  founded,  I  should  in- 
deed, be  a  fit  object  of  public  censure  ;  but  if,  on  the  contrary,  it  shall  be 
found  that  others,  inimical  both  to  him  and  to  me,  have  substituted  their 
own  interested  wishes  for  my  public  promises,  I  trust  that  the  indignation 
which  they  would  excite,  will  be  turned  from  me. 

My,  letter,  addressed  to  the  editors  of  the  Intelligencer,  under  date  of 
the  15th  of  November,  1822,  is  made  the  occasion  for  ascribing  to  me 
the  promise  and  the  pledge  to  make  those  treasonable  disclosures  on  Mr. 
Adams.  Let  that  letter  speak  for  itself,  and  it  will  be  seen  how  little  just- 
ice there  is  for  such  an  assertion.  It  adverts  to  the  controversy  which 
had  arisen  between  Messrs.  Adams  and  Russell,  and  then  proceeds  to  state 
that,  "  in  the  course  of  several  publications,  of  which  it  has  been  the  oc- 
casion, and  particularly  in  the  appendix  to  a  pamphlet,  which  had  been 
recently  published  by  the  honorable  John  Quincy  Adams,  I  think  there 
are  some  errors,  no  doubt  unintentional,  both  as  to  matters  of  fact  and 
matters  of  opinion,  in  regard  to  the  transactions  at  Ghent,  relating  to  the 
navigation  of  the  Mississippi,  and  certain  liberties  claimed  by  the  United 
States  in  the  fisheries,  and  to  the  part  which  I  bore  in  those  transactions. 
Those  important  interests  are  now  well  secured."  "  An  account,  therefore, 
of  what  occurred  in  the  negotiation  at  Ghent,  on  those  two  subjects,  is  not, 
perhaps,  necessary  to  the  present  or  future  security  of  any  of  the  rights 
of  the  nation,  and  is  only  interesting  as  appertaining  to  its  past  history. 
With  these  impressions,  and  being  extremely  unwilling  to  present  myself, 
at  any  time,  before  the  public,  I  had  almost  resolved  to  remain  silent,  and 
thus  expose  myself  to  the  inference  of  an  acquiescence  in  the  correctness 
of  all  the  statements  made  by  both  my  colleagues  ;  but  I  have,  on  more 
reflection,  thought  it  may  be  expected  of  me,  and  be  considered  as  a  duty 
on  my  part,  to  contribute  all  in  my  power  toward  a  full  and  faithful  un 


ME.    CLAY'S   ADDRESS    TO    HIS    CONSTITUENTS.  315 

derstanding  of  the  transactions  referred  to.  Under  this  conviction,  I  will, 
at  some  future  period,  more  propitious  than  the  present  to  calm  and  dis- 
passionate consideration,  and  when  there  can  be  no  misinterpretation  of 
motives,  lay  before  the  rjublic  a  narrative  of  those  transactions,  as  I  un- 
derstood them." 

From  even  a  careless  perusal  of  that  letter,  it  is  apparent,  that  the  only 
two  subjects  of  the  negotiations  at  Ghent,  to  which  it  refers,  were  the  nav- 
igation of  the  Mississippi,  and  certain  fishing  liberties  ;  that  the  errors 
which  I  had  supposed  were  committed,  applied  to  both  Mr.  Russell  and 
Mr.  Adams,  though  more  particularly  to  the  appendix  of  the  latter  ;  that 
they  were  unintentional ;  that  they  affected  myself  principally ;  that  I 
deemed  them  of  no  public  importance,  as  connected  with  the  then,  or  future 
security  of  any  of  the  rights  of  the  nation,  but  only  interesting  to  its  past 
history ;  that  I  doubted  the  necessity  of  my  offering  to  the  public  any  ac- 
count of  those  transactions ;  and  that  the  narrative  which  1  promised  was 
to  be  presented  at  a  season  of  more  calm,  and  when  there  could  be  no  mis- 
interpretation of  motives.  Although  Mr.  Adams  believes  otherwise,  I  yet 
think  there  are  some  unintentional  errors  in  the  controversial  papers  be- 
tween him  and  Mr.  Russell.  But  I  have  reserved  to  myself  an  exclusive 
right  of  judging  when  I  shall  execute  the  promise  which  I  have  made,  and 
shall  be  neither  quickened  nor  retarded  in  its  performance  by  the  friendly 
anxieties  of  any  of  my  opponents. 

If  injury  accrue  to  anyone  by  the  delay  in  publishing  the  narrative,  the 
public  will  not  suffer  by  it.     It  is  already  known  by  the  publication  of 
the  British   and  American  projets,  the  protocols,  and  the  correspondence 
between  the  respective  plenipotentiaries,  that  the  British  government  made 
at  Ghent  a  demand  of  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi,  by  an   article  in 
their  projet  nearly  in  the  same  words  as  those  which  were  employed  in  the 
treaty  of  1783  ;  that  a  majority  of  the  American  Commissioners  was  in 
favor  of  acceding  to  that  demand,  upon  the  condition  that  the  British 
government  would  concede  to  us  the  same  fishing  liberties  within  their 
jurisdiction,  as  were  secured  to  us  by  the  same  treaty  of  1*783  ;  and  that 
both  demands  were  finally  abandoned.     The  fact  of  these  mutual  proposi- 
tions was  communicated  by  me  to  the  American  public  in  a  speech  which 
I  delivered  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  on  the  29th  day  of  January, 
1816.     Mr.  Hopkinson  had  arrainged  the  terms  of  the  treaty  of  peace, 
and  charged  upon  the  war  and  the  administration  the  loss  of  the  fish- 
ing liberties,  within  the  British  jurisdiction,  which  we  enjoyed  prior  to  the 
war.     In  vindicating,  in  my  reply  to  him,  the  course  of  the  government, 
and  the  conditions  of  the  peace,  I  stated  : 

"  When  the  British  commissioners  demanded,  in  their  project,  a  renewal  to 
Great  Britain  of  the  right  of  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi,  secured  by  the 
treaty  of  1783,  a  bare  majority  of  the  American  commissioners  offered  to  renew 
it,  upon  the  condition  that  the  liberties  in  question  were  renewed  to  us.     I  was 


316  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

not  one  of  that  majority.  I  will  not  trouble  the  committee  with  my  reasons 
for  being  opposed  to  the  offer.  A  majority  of  my  colleagues,  actuated,  I  be- 
lieve, by  the  best  motives,  made,  however,  the  offer,  and  it  was  refused  by  the 
British  commissioners.' 

And  what  I  thought  of  my  colleagues  of  the  majority,  appears  from 
the  same  extract.  The  spring  after  the  termination  of  the  negotiations  at 
Ghent,  I  went  to  London,  and  entered  upon  a  new  and  highly  important 
negotiation  with  two  of  them  (Messrs.  Adams  and  Gallatin),  which  resulted, 
on  the  third  day  of  July,  1815,  in  the  commercial  convention,  which  has 
been  since  made  the  basis  of  most  of  our  commercial  arrangements  with 
foreign  powers.  Now,  if  I  had  discovered  at  Ghent,  as  has  been  asserted, 
that  either  of  them  was  false  and  faithless  to  his  country,  would  I  have 
voluntarily  commenced  with  them  another  negotiation  ?  Further  :  there 
never  has  been  a  period,  during  our  whole  acquaintance,  that  Mr.  Adams 
and  I  have  not  exchanged,  when  we  have  met,  friendly  salutations,  and  the 
courtesies  and  hospitalities  of  social  intercourse. 

The  address  proceeds  to  characterize  the  support  which  I  gave  to  Mr. 
Adams  as  unnatural.  The  authors  of  the  address  have  not  stated  why  it  is 
unnatural,  and  we  are  therefore  left  to  conjecture  their  meaning.  Is  it  be- 
cause Mr.  Adams  is  from  New  England,  and  I  am  a  citizen  of  the  West? 
If  it  be  unnatural  in  the  western  States  to  support  a  citizen  of  New  En- 
gland, it  must  be  equally  unnatural  in  the  New  England  States  to  support 
a  citizen  of  the  West.  And,  on  the  same  principle,  the  New  England 
States  ought  to  be  restrained  from  concurring  in  the  election  of  a  citizen 
of  the  southern  States,  or  the  southern  States  from  co-operating  in  the 
election  of  a  citizen  of  New  England.  And,  consequently,  the  support 
which  the  last  three  presidents  have  derived  from  New  England,  and  that 
which  the  vice-president  receutly  received  has  been  most  unnaturally 
given.  The  tendency  of  such  reasoning  would  be  to  denationalize  us,  and 
to  contract  every  part  of  the  Union  within  the  narrow,  selfish  limits  of  its 
own  section.  It  would  be  still  worse  ;  it  would  lead  to  the  destruction  of 
the  Union  itself.  For  if  it  be  unnatural  in  one  section  to  support  a 
citizen  in  another,  the  Union  itself  must  be  unnatural ;  all  our  ties,  all  our 
glories,  all  that  is  animating  in  the  past,  all  that  is  bright  and  cheering  in 
the  future,  must  be  unnatural.  Happily,  such  is  the  admirable  texture  of 
our  Union,  that  the  interests  of  all  its  parts  are  closely  interwoven.  If 
there  are  strong  points  of  affinity  between  the  South  and  the  West,  there 
are  interests  of  not  less,  if  not  greater  strength  and  vigor  binding  the 
West,  and  the  North,  and  the  East. 

Before  I  close  this  address,  it  is  my  duty,  which  I  proceed  to  perform 
with  great  regret,  on  account  of  the  occasion  which  calls  for  it,  to  invite 
your  attention  to  a  letter,  addressed  by  General  Jackson  to  Mr.  Swartwout, 
on  the  23d  day  of  February  last.  The  names  of  both  the  general  and  my- 
self had  been  before  the  American  public  for  its  highest  office.  We  had 
both  been  unsuccessful.     The  unfortunate  have  usually  some  sympathy  for 


MR.    CLAY'S   ADDRESS    TO   HIS    CONSTITUENTS.  317 

each  otber.  For  myself,  I  claim  no  merit  for  the  cheerful  acquiescence 
■which  I  have  given  in  a  result  by  which  I  was  excluded  from  the  ilouse. 
I  have  believed  that  the  decision  by  the  constituted  authorities,  in  favor  of 
others,  has  been  founded  upon  a  conviction  of  the  superiority  of  their  pre- 
tensions. It  has  been  my  habit,  when  an  election  is  once  decided,  to  for- 
get, as  soon  as  possible,  all  the  irritating  circumstances  which  attended  the 
preceding  canvass.  If  one  be  successful  he  should  be  content  with  his 
success.  If  he  have  lost  it,  railing  will  do  no  good.  I  never  gave  General 
Jackson  nor  his  friends  any  reason  to  believe  that  I  would,  in  any  contin- 
gency, support  him.  lie  had,  as  I  thought,  no  public  claims,  anil,  I  will 
now  add,  no  personal  claims,  if  these  ought  to  be  ever  considered,  to  my 
support.  No  one,  therefore,  ought  to  have  been  disappointed  or  chagrined 
that  I  did  not  vote  for  him,  no  more  than  I  was  neither  surprised  nor  dis- 
appointed that  he  did  not,  on  a  more  recent  occasion,  feel  it  to  be  his  duty 
to  vote  for  me.  After  commenting  upon  a  particular  phrase  used  in  my 
letter  to  Judge  Brooke,  a  calm  reconsideration  of  which  will,  I  think,  satisfy 
any  person  that  it  was  not  employed  in  an  offensive  sense,  if  indeed  it  have 
an  offensive  sense,  the  general,  in  his  fetter  to  Mr.  Swartwout,  proceeds  to 
remark:  "No  one  beheld  me  seeking, 'through  art  or  management,  to  en- 
tice any  representative  in  Congress  frorn  a  conscientious  responsibility  of 
his  own,  or  the  wishes  of  his  constitu/ents.  No  midnight  taper  burned  by 
me ;  no  secret  conclaves  were  held,  nor  cabals  entered  into  to  persuade  any 
one  to  a  violation  of  pledges  given,  or  ©f-instructions  received.  By  me  no 
plans  were  concerted  to  impair  the  pure  ^principles  of  our  republican  in- 
stitutions, nor  to  prostrate  that  fundamental  maxim  which  maintains  the 
supremacy  of  the  people's  will.  On  the  contrary,  having  never  in  any 
manner,  before  the  people  or  Congress,  interfered  in  the  slightest  degree 
with  the  question,  my  conscience  stands  void  of  offense,  and  will  go  quietly 
with  me,  regardless  of  the  insinuation^  of  those  who,  through  management, 
may  seek  an  influence  not  sanctioned  by  iutegrity  and  merit."  I  am  not 
aware  that  this  defense  of  himself  was  rendered  necessary  by  any  charges 
brought  forward  against  the  general.  Certainly  I  never  made  any  such 
charges  against  him.  I  will  not  suppose  that,  in  the  passage  cited,  he  in- 
tended to  impute  to  me  the  misconduct  which  he  describes,  and  yet,  taking 
the  whole  context  of  his  letter  together,  and  coupling  it  with  Mr.  Kremer's 
address,  it  can  not  be  disguised  that  others  may  suppose  he  intended  to  re- 
fer to  me.  I  am  quite  sure  that  if  he  did,  he  could  not  have  formed  those 
unfavorable  opinions  of  me  upon  any  personal  observation  of  my  conduct 
made  by  himself;  for  a  supposition  that  they  were  founded  upon  his  own 
knowledge,  would  imply  that  my  lodgings  and  my  person  had  been  sub- 
jected to  a  system  of  espionage  wholly  incompatible  with  the  open,  manly, 
and  honorable  conduct  of  a  gallant  soldier.  If  he  designed  any  insinua- 
tions against  me,  I  must  believe  that  he  made  them  upon  the  information  of 
others,  of  whom  I  can  ouly  say  that  they  have  deceived  his  credulity,  and 
are  entirely  unworthy  of  all  credit.     I  entered  into  no  cabals ;  I  held  no 


318  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

secret  conclaves ;  I  enticed  no  man  to  violate  pledges  given  or  instructions 
received.  The  members  from  Ohio,  and  from  the  other  western  States, 
with  whom  I  voted,  were  all  of  them  as  competent  as  I  was  to  form  an 
opinion  on  the  pending  election.  The  McArtlmrs  and  the  Metcalfs,  and 
the  other  gentlemen  from  the  West  (some  of  whom  have,  if  I  have  not, 
bravely  "  made  an  effort  to  repel  an  invading  foe"),  are  as  incapable  of  dis- 
honor as  any  men  breathing ;  as  disinterested,  as  unambitious,  as  exclu- 
sively devoted  to  the  bests  interests  of  their  country.  It  was  quite  as 
likely  that  I  should  be  influenced  by  them  as  that  I  could  control  their 
votes.  Our  object  was  not  to  impair,  but  to  preserve  from  all  danger  the 
purity  of  our  republican  institutions.  And  how  I  prostrated  the  maxim 
which  maintains  the  supremacy  of  the  people's  will  I  am  entirely  at  a  loss 
to  comprehend.  The  illusions  of  the  general's  imagination  deceive  him. 
The  people  of  the  United  States  had  never  decided  the  election  in  his  fa- 
vor. If  the  people  had  willed  his  election,  he  would  have  been  elected.  It 
was  because  they  had  not  willed  his  election,  nor  that  of  any  other  can- 
didate, that  the  duty  of  making  a  choice  devolved  on  the  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives.    The  general  remarks : 

"  Mr.  Clay  has  never  yet  risked  himself  for  his  country.  He  has  never  sacri- 
ficed his  repose,  nor  made  an  effort  to  repel  an  invading  foe ;  of  course  his  con- 
science assured  him  it  was  altogether  wrong  in  any  other  man  to  lead  his  coun- 
trymen to  battle  and  victory." 

The  logic  of  this  conclusion  is  not  very  striking.  General  Jackson 
fio-hts  better  than  he  reasons.  When  have  I  failed  to  concur  in  awarding 
appropriate  honors  to  those  who,  on  the  sea  or  on  the  land,  have  sustained 
the  glory  of  our  arms,  if  I  could  not  always  approve  of  the  acts  of  some 
of  them  ?  It  is  true  that  it  has  been  my  misfortune  never  to  have  repelled 
an  invading  foe,  nor  to  have  led  my  countrymen  to  victory.  If  I  had,  I 
should  have  left  to  others  to  proclaim  and  appreciate  the  deed.  The  gen- 
eral's destiny  and  mine  have  led  us  in  different  directions.  In  the  civil 
employments  of  my  country,  to  which  I  have  been  confined,  I  regret  that 
the  little  service  which  I  have  been  able  to  render  it  falls  far  short  of  my 
wishes.  But  why  this  denunciation  of  those  who  have  not  repelled  an  in- 
vading foe,  or  led  our  armies  to  victory  ?  At  the  very  moment  when  he 
is  inveighing  against  an  objection  to  his  election  to  the  presidency,  founded 
upon  the  exclusive  military  nature  of  his  merits,  does  he  not  perceive  that 
he  is  establishing  its  validity  by  proscribing  every  man  who  has  not  suc- 
cessfully fought  the  public  enemy;  and  that,  by  such  a  general  proscrip- 
tion, and  the  requirement  of  successful  military  service  as  the  only  condi- 
tion of  civil  preferment,  the  inevitable  effect  would  be  the  ultimate  estab- 
lishment of  a  military  government  ? 

If  the  contents  of  the  letter  to  Mr.  Swartwout,  were  such  as  justly  to 
excite  surprise,  there  were  other  circumstances  not  calculated  to  diminish 
it.  Of  all  the  citizens  of  the  United  States,  that  gentleman  is  one  of  the 
last  to  whom  it  was  necessary  to  address  any  vindication  of  General  Jack- 


MR.    CLAY'S    ADDRESS   TO    HIS    CONSTITUENTS.  319 

son.  lie  had  given  abundant  evidence  of  his  entire  devotion  to  the  cause 
of  the  general.  He  was  here  after  the  election,  and  was  one  of  a  com- 
mittee who  invited  the  general  to  a  public  dinner,  proposed  to  be  given  to 
him  in  this  place.  My  letter  to  Judge  Brooke  was  published  in  the  papers 
of  this  city  on  the  12th  of  February.  The  general's  note,  declining  the 
invitation  of  Messrs.  Swartwout  and  others,  was  published  on  the  14th, 
in  the  National  Journal.  The  probability,  therefore,  is  that  he  did  not 
leave  this  city  until  after  he  had  a  full  opportunity  to  receive,  in  a  per- 
sonal interview  with  the  general,  any  verbal  observations  upon  it  which  he 
might  have  thought  proper  to  make.  The  letter  to  Mr.  Swartwout, 
bears  date  the  23d  of  February.  If  received  by  him  in  New  York,  it 
must  have  reached  him,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  mail,  on  the  2oth 
or  26th.  Whether  intended  or  not  as  a  "  private  communication," 
and  noL  for  the  "public  eye,"  as  alleged  by  him,  there  is  much  probabil- 
ity in  believing  that  its  publication  in  New  York,  on  the  4th  of  March, 
was  then  made,  like  Mr.  Kremer's  address,  with  the  view  to  its  ar- 
rival in  this  city  in  time  to  affect  my  nomination  to  the  Senate.  In 
point  of  fact,  it  reached  here  the  day  before  the  Senate  acted  on  that 
nomination. 

Fellow-citizens,  I  am  sensible  that,  generally,  a  public  officer  had  better 
abstain  from  any  vindication  of  his  conduct,  and  leave  it  to  the  candor 
and  justice  of  his  countrymen,  under  all  its  attending  circumstances. 
Such  has  been  the  course  which  I  have  heretofore  prescribed  to  myself. 
This  is  the  first,  as  I  hope  it  may  be  the  last,  occasion  of  my  thus  appear- 
ing before  you.  The  separation  which  has  just  takan  place  between  us, 
and  the  venom,  if  not  the  vigor  of  the  late  onsets  upon  my  public  conduct, 
will,  I  hope,  be  allowed  in  this  instance  to  form  an  adequate  apology.  It 
has  been  upward  of  twenty  years  since  I  first  entered  the  public  service. 
Nearly  three  fourths  of  that  time,  with  some  intermissions,  I  have  repre- 
sented the  same  district  in  Congress,  with  but  little  variation  in  its  form. 
During  that  long  period,  you  have  beheld  our  country  passing  through 
scenes  of  peace  and  war,  of  prosperity  and  adversity,  and  of  party  divis- 
ions, local  and  general,  often  greatly  exasperated  against  each  other.  I 
have  been  an  actor  iu  most  of  those  scenes.  Throughout  the  whole  of 
them,  you  have  clung  to  me  with  an  affectionate  confidence  which  has 
never  been  surpassed.  I  have  found  in  your  attachment,  iu  every  embar- 
rassment in  my  public  career,  the  greatest  consolation,  and  the  most  en- 
couraging support.  I  should  regard  the  loss  of  it  as  one  of  the  most  af- 
flicting public  misfortunces  which  could  befall  me.  That  I  have  often 
misconceived  your  true  interests,  is  highly  probable.  That  I  have  ever 
sacrificed  them  to  the  object  of  personal  aggrandizement,  I  utterly  deny. 
And,  for  the  purity  of  my  motives,  however  in  other  respects  I  may  be 
unworthy  to  approach  the  throne  of  grace  and  mercy,  I  appeal  to  the 
justice  of  my  God,  with  all  the  confidence  which  can  flow  from  a  con- 
sciousness of  nerfect  rectitude. 


ON  THE  PRESIDENTIAL  ELECTION  OF  1825. 

LEWISBURG,  VIRGINIA,  AUGUST  30,  1826. 

[The  preliminary  correspondence  which  led  to  the  following 
speech,  will  indicate  the  circumstances  and  the  occasion.  It  is 
virtually  an  amplification  of  the  previously-recorded  address  of 
Mr.  Clay  to  his  constituents,  but  touches  more  on  the  policy  of 
the  new  administration  than  personal  matters.  As  the  persecu- 
tion of  Mr.  Clay  by  General  Jackson  and  his  party  was  rampant 
at  this  time,  and  continued  in  aggravated  forms  during  the  ad- 
ministration of  Mr.  Adams,  whenever  he  spoke  in  public  it  was 
natural  and  unavoidable  that  he  should  allude  to  this  state  of 
things.  This  invitation  to  Lewisburg  was  occasioned  by  a  feel- 
ing of  sympathy  with  Mr.  Clay,  as  well  as  by  admiration  of  his 
talents  and  character.  It  was,  doubtless,  mutually  agreeable  to 
the  parties — the  guest  and  the  entertainers — and  gave  Mr.  Clay 
an  opportunity  to  say  something  of  the  administration  of  which 
he  was  a  member,  and  which  was  assailed  by  the  Jackson  party, 
already  at  war  with  it.] 

Lewisburg,  August  23d,  1826. 
The  Honorable  Henry  Clay  : 

Sir,  at  a  meeting  of  a  respectable  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  Lewisburg  and 
its  vicinity,  convened  in  the  court-house  on  the  22d  instant,  it  was  unanimously 
determined  to  greet  your  arrival  among  them  by  some  public  demonstration  of 
the  respect  which  they  in  common  with  a  great  portion  of  the  community  feel 
toward  one  of  their  most  distinguished  fellow-citizens.  It  was  therefore  unani- 
mously resolved,  as  the  most  eligible  means  of  manifesting  their  feelings,  to  re- 
quest the  honor  of  your  presence  at  a  public  dinner  to  be  given  at  the  tavern  of 
Mr.  Frazer,  in  the  town  of  Lewisburg,  on  Wednesday  the  30th  instant. 

In  pursuance  of  the  above  measures,  we,  as  a  committee,  have  been  ap- 
pointed to  communicate  their  resolutions  and  solicit  a  compliance  with  their 
invitation.  In  performing  this  agreeable  duty,  we  can  not  but  express  our  ad- 
miration of  the  uniform  course  which,  during  a  long  political  career,  you  have 
pursued  with  so  much  honor  to  yourself  and  country.  Although  the  detractions 
of  envy,  and  the  violence  of  party  feeling  have  endeavored  to  blast  your  fair 
reputation,  and  destroy  the  confidence  reposed  in  you  by  the  citizens  of  the 
United  States,  we  rejoice  to  inform  you,  that  the  people  of  the  western  part  of 


ON  THE  PRESIDENTIAL  ELECTION  OF  1825.       321 

that  Slate  which  claims  you  as  one  of  its  most  gifted  sons,  still  retain  the  same 
high  feeling  of  respect,  wluch  they  have  always  manifested,  in  spite  of  the  male- 
dictions and  bickerings  of  disappointed  editors  and  interested  politicians.  We 
can  not  close  our  communication  without  hailing  you  as  one  of  the  most  dis- 
tinguished advocates  of  that  system  of  internal  improvement  which  has  already 
proved  so  beneficial  to  our  country,  and  which  at  no  distant  period  will  make 
even  these  desert  mountains  to  blossom  as  the  rose. 

We  have  the  honor  to  subscribe  ourselves,  yours  with  esteem, 
J.  Gr.  M'Clenachen,  John  Beirne, 

James  M'Laughlin,  J.  A.  North, 

J.  F.  Caldwell,  Henry  Erskine. 

White  Sulphur  Springs,  IMh  August,  1826. 
Gentlemen,  I  have  received  the  note  which  you  did  me  the  honor  on  yester- 
day to  address  to  me,  inviting  me,  in  behalf  of  a  respectable  number  of  the 
citizens  of  Lewisburg  and  its  vicinity,  to  a  public  dinner  at  Mr.  Frazer's  tavern, 
on  Wednesday  next,  which  they  have  the  goodness  to  propose,  in  consequence 
of  my  arrival  among  them  as  a  manifestation  of  their  respect.  Such  a  compli- 
ment was  most  unexpected  by  me  on  a  journey  to  Washington,  by  this  route, 
recommended  to  my  choice  by  the  pure  air  of  a  mountain  region,  and  justly- 
famed  mineral  waters,  a  short  use  of  which  I  hoped  might  contribute  to  the 
perfect  re-establishment  of  my  health.  The  gratification  which  I  derive  from 
this  demonstration  of  kindness  and  confidence,  springs  in  no  small  degree,  from 
the  consideration  that  it  is  the  spontaneous  testimony  of  those  with  whom  I 
share  a  common  origin,  in  a  venerated  State,  endeared  to  me  by  an  early  tie 
of  respect  and  affection,  which  no  circumstance  can  ever  dissolve.  In  com- 
municating to  that  portion  of  the  citizens  of  Lewisburg  and  its  vicinity,  who 
have  been  pleased  thus  to  favor  me,  by  their  distinguished  notice,  my  ac- 
ceptance of  their  hospitable  invitation,  I  pray  you  to  add  my  profound  ac- 
knowledgments. And  of  the  friendly  and  nattering  manner  in  which  you 
conveyed  it,  and  for  the  generous  sympathy,  characteristic  of  Virginia,  which 
you  are  so  obliging  as  to  express,  on  account  of  the  detractions  of  which  I  have 
been  the  selected  object,  and  the  meditated  victim,  be  assured  that  I  shall  al- 
ways retain  a  lively  and  grateful  remembrance. 

I  am,  gentlemen,  with  great  esteem  and  regard,  faithfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

Henry  Claz; 

Messrs.  MClenachen,  North,  M'Laughlin,  Caldwell  Beirne,  and  Erskine, 
etc.,  etc. 

TOAST 

Seventh.  Our  distinguished  guest,  Henry  Clay — the  statesman,  orator,  pat- 
riot, and  philanthropist :  his  splendid  talents  shed  luster  on  his  native  State,  his 
eloquence  is  an  ornament  to  his  country. 

When  this  toast  was  drunk,  Mr.  Clay  rose,  and  said,  that  he  had  never 
before  felt  so  intensely  the  want  of  those  powers  of  eloquence  which  had 
been  erroneously  ascribed  to  him.  He  hoped,  however,  that  in  his  plain 
and  unaffected  language  he  might  be  allowed,  without  violating  any  es- 
tablished usage  which  prevails  here,  to  express  his  grateful  sensibility,  ex- 

21 


322  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

cited  by  the  sentiment  with  which  he  had  been  honored,  and  for  the  kind 
and  respectful  consideration  of  him  manifested  on  the  occasion  which  had 
brought  them  together.  In  passing  through  my  native  State,  said  he, 
toward  which  I  have  ever  borne,  and  shall  continue,  in  all  vicissitudes,  to 
cherish,  the  geatest  respect  and  affection,  I  expected  to  be  treated  with  its 
accustomed  courtesy  and  private  hospitality.  But  I  did  not  anticipate  that 
I  should  be  the  object  of  such  public,  distinguished,  and  cordial  manifesta- 
tions of  regard.  In  offering  you  my  poor  and  inadequate  return  of  my 
warm  and  respectful  thanks,  I  pray  you  to  believe  that  I  shall  treasure  up 
these  testimonies  among  the  most  gratifying  reminiscences  of  my  life. 
The  public  service  which  I  have  rendered  my  country,  your  too  favorable 
opinion  of  which  has  prompted  you  to  exhibit  these  demonstrations  of  your 
esteem,  has  fallen  far  below  the  measure  of  usefulness,  which  I  should  have 
been  happy  to  have  filled.  I  claim  for  it  only  the  humble  merit  of  pure 
and  patriotic  intention.  Such  as  it  has  been,  I  have  not  always  been  for- 
tunate enough  to  give  satisfaction  to  every  section  and  to  all  the  great  in- 
terests of  our  country. 

When  an  attempt  was  made  to  impose  upon  a  new  State,  about  to 
be  admitted  into  the  Union,  restrictions,  incompatible,  as  I  thought  with 
her  coequal  sovereign  power,  I  was  charged  in  the  North  with  be- 
ing too  partial  to  the  South,  and  as  being  friendly  to  that  unfortunate 
condition  of  slavery,  of  the  evils  of  which  none  are  more  sensible  than 
I  am. 

At  another  period,  when  I  believed  that  the  industry  of  this  country 
required  some  protection  against  the  selfish  and  contracted  legislation  of 
foreign  powers,  and  to  constitute  it  a  certain  and  safe  source  of  supply,  in 
all  exigences ;  the  charge  against  me  was  transposed,  and  I  was  converted 
into  a  foe  of  southern,  and  an  infatuated  friend  of  northern  and  western 
interests. 

There  were  not  wanting  persons  in  every  section  of  the  Union,  in  an- 
other stage  of  our  history,  to  accuse  me  with  rashly  contributing  to  the 
support  of  a  war,  the  only  alternative  left  to  our  honor  by  the  persevering 
injustice  of  a  foreign  nation.  These  contradictory  charges  and  perverted 
views  gave  me  no  concern,  because  I  was  confident  that  time  and  truth 
would  prevail  over  all  misconceptions,  and  because  they  did  not  impeach 
my  public  integrity.  But  I  confess  I  was  not  prepared  to  expect  the  as- 
persions which  I  have  experienced  on  account  of  a  more  recent  discharge 
of  public  duty.  My  situation  on  the  occasion  to  which  I  refer,  was  most 
peculiar  and  extraordinary,  unlike  that  of  any  other  American  citizen. 
One  of  the  three  candidates  for  the  presidency  presented  to  the  choice  of 
the  House  of  Representatives,  was  out  of  the  question,  for  notorious  reasons 
now  admitted  by  all.  Limited  as  the  competition  was  to  the  other  two,  I 
had  to  choose  between  a  statesman  long  experienced  at  home  and  abroad 
in  numerous  civil  situations,  and  a  soldier,  brave,  gallant,  and  successful, 
but  a  mere  soldier,  who,  although  he  had  also  filled  several  civil  offices, 


ON   THE   PRESIDENTIAL   ELECTION  OF   1825.  323 

had  quickly  resigned  them  all,  frankly  acknowledging,  in  some  instances, 
his  incompetency  to  discharge  their  duties. 

It  has  been  said  that  I  had   some  differences  with  the  present  chief 
magistrate  at  Ghent.     It   is  true   that  we  did  not  agree  on  one  of  tho 
many  important  questions  which  arose  during  the  negotiations  in  that  city, 
but  the  difference  equally  applied  to  our  present  minister  at  London  and  to 
the  lamented  Bayard,  between  whom  and  myself,  although  we  belonged  to 
opposite  political  parties,  there  existed  a  warm  friendship  to  the  hour  of 
his  death.     It  was  not  of  a  nature  to  prevent  our  co-operation  together 
in  the  public  service,  as  is  demonstrated  by  the  convention  at  London 
subsequently  negotiated  by  Messrs.  Adams,  Gallatin,  and  myself.     It  was 
a  difference  of  opinion  on  a  point  of  expediency,  and  did  not  relate  to 
any  constitutional  or  fundamental  principle.     But  with  respect  to  the  con- 
duct of  the  distinguished  citizen  of  Tennessee,  I  had  solemnly  expressed, 
under  the  highest  obligations,  opinions,  which,  whether  right  or  wrong, 
were  sincerely  and  honestly  entertained,  and  are  still  held.     These  opinions 
related  to  a  military  exercise  of  power  believed  to  be  arbitrary  and  uncon- 
stitutional.    I  should  have  justly  subjected  myself  to  the  grossest  incon- 
sistency, if  I  had  given  him  my  suffrage.     I  thought  if  he  were  elected, 
the  sword  and  the  Constitution,  bad  companions,  would  be  brought  too 
near  together.     I  could  not  have  foreseen  that,  fully  justified  as  I  have 
been  by  those  very  constituents,  in  virtue  of  whose  authority  I  exerted  the 
right  of  free  suffrage,  I  should  nevertheless  be  charged  with  a  breach  of 
duty  and  corruption  by  strangers  to  them,  standing  in  no  relation  to  them 
but  that  of  being  citizens  of  other  States,  members  of  the  confederacy. 
It  is  in  vain  that  these  revilers  have  been  called  upon  for  their  proofs ; 
have  been  defied,  and  are  again  invited,  to  enter  upon  any  mode  of  fair  in- 
vestigation and  trial ;  shrinking  from  every  impartial  examination,  they 
persevere,  with  increased  zeal,  in  the  propagation  of  calumny,  under  the 
hope  of  supplying  by  the  frequency  and  boldness  of  asseveration,  the  want 
of  truth  and  the  deficiency  of  evidence ;  until  we  have  seen  the  spectacle 
exhibited  of  converting  the  hall  of  the  first  legislative  assembly  upon  earth, 
on  the  occasion  of  discussions  which  above  all  others  should  have  been 
characterized  by  dignity,  calmness,  and  temperance,  into  a  theater  for 
spreading  suspicions  and  groundless  imputations  against  an  absent  and  in- 
nocent individual. 

Driven  from  every  other  hold,  they  have  seized  on  the  only  plank  left 
within  their  grasp,  that  of  my  acceptance  of  the  office  of  Secretary  of 
State,  which  has  been  asserted  to  be  the  consummation  of  a  previous  cor- 
rupt arrangement.  What  can  I  oppose  to  such  an  assertion,  but  positive, 
peremptory,  and  unqualified  denial,  and  a  repetition  of  the  demand  for 
proof  and  trial  ?  The  office  to  which  I  have  been  appointed  is  that  of  the 
country,  created  by  it,  and  administered  for  its  benefit.  In  deciding  whether 
I  should  accept  it  or  not,  I  did  not  take  counsel  from  those  who,  foreseeing 
the  probability  of  my  designation  for  it,  sought  to  deter  me  from  its  accept- 


324  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY   CLAY. 

ance  by  fabricating  anticipated  charges,  which  would  have  been  preferred 
with  the  same  zeal  and  alacrity,  however  I  might  have  decided.  I  took 
counsel  from  my  friends,  from  my  duty,  from  my  conscious  innocence  of 
unworthy  and  false  imputations.  I  was  not  left  at  liberty  by  either  my 
enemies  or  my  friends  to  decline  the  office.  I  would  willingly  have  de- 
clined it  from  an  unaffected  distrust  of  my  ability  to  perform  its  high  duties, 
if  I  could  have  houorably  declined  it.  I  hope  the  uniform  tenor  of  my 
whole  public  life  will  protect  me  against  the  supposition  of  any  unreason- 
able avidity  for  public  employment.  During  the  administration  of  that 
illustrious  man,  to  whose  civil  services  more  than  to  those  of  any  other 
American  patriot,  living  or  dead,  this  country  is  indebted  for  the  blessings 
of  its  present  Constitution,  now  more  than  ten  years  ago,  the  mission  to 
Russia,  and  a  place  in  his  cabinet,  were  successively  offered  me.  A  place 
in  his  cabinet,  at  that  period  of  my  life,  was  more  than  equivalent  to  any 
place  under  any  administration  at  my  present  more  advanced  age.  His 
immediate  successor  tendered  to  me  the  same  place  in  his  cabinet,  which 
he  anxiously  urged  me  to  accept,  and  the  mission  to  England.  Gentlemen, 
I  hope  you  will  believe  that  far  from  being  impelled  by  any  vain  or 
boastful  spirit,  to  mention  these  things,  I  do  it  with  humility  and  morti- 
fication. 

If  I  had  refused  the  Department  of  State,  the  same  individuals  who  now, 
in  the  absence  of  all  proof,  against  all  probability,  and  in  utter  disregard 
of  all  truth,  proclaim  the  existence  of  a  corrupt  previous  arrangement, 
would  have  propagated  the  same  charge  with  the  same  affected  confidence 
which  they  now  unblushingly  assume.  And  it  would  have  been  said,  with 
at  least  much  plausibility,  that  I  had  contributed  to  the  election  of  a  chief 
magistrate,  of  whom  I  thought  so  unfavorably  that  I  would  not  accept  that 
place  in  his  cabinet  which  is  generally  regarded  as  the  first.  I  thought  it 
my  duty,  unawed  by  their  denunciations,  to  proceed  in  the  office  assigned 
me  by  the  president  and  Senate,  to  render  the  country  the  best  service  of 
which  my  poor  abilities  are  capable.  If  this  administration  should  show 
itself  unfriendly  to  American  liberty  and  to  free  and  liberal  institutions; 
if  it  should  be  conducted  upon  a  system  adverse  to  those  principles  of 
public  policy,  which  I  have  ever  endeavored  to  sustain,  and  I  should  be 
found  still  clinging  to  office ;  then  nothing  which  could  be  said  by  those 
who  are  inimical  to  me,  would  be  undeserved. 

But  the  president  ought  not  to  have  appointed  one  who  had  voted  for 
him.  Mr.  Jefferson  did  not  think  so,  who  called  to  his  cabinet  a  gentleman 
who  had  voted  for  him  in  the  most  warmly  contested  election  that  has 
ever  occurred  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  and  who  appointed  to  other 
highly  important  offices  other  members  of  the  same  House,  who  voted  for 
him.  Mr.  Madison  did  not  think  so,  who  did  not  feel  himself  restrained 
from  sending  me  on  a  foreign  service,  because  I  had  supported  his  elec- 
tion. Mr.  Monroe  did  not  think  so,  who  appointed  in  his  cabinet  a  gen- 
tleman, now  filling  the  second  office  in  the  government,  who  attended  the 


ON  THE  PRESIDENTIAL  ELECTION  OF  1825.       325 

caucus  that  nominated  and  warmly  and  efficiently  espoused  bis  election. 
But,  suppose  the  president  acted  upon  the  most  disinterested  doctrine  which 
is  now  contended  for  by  those  who  opposed  his  election,  and  were  to  ap- 
point to  public  office  from  their  ranks  only,  to  the  entire  exclusion  of  those 
who  voted  for  him,  would  he  then  escape  their  censure  ?  No  !  we  have 
seen  him  charged,  for  that  equal  distribution  of  the  public  service  among 
every  class  of  citizens,  which  has  hitherto  characterized  his  administra- 
tion, with  the  nefarious  purpose  of  buying  up  portions  of  the  community. 
A  spirit  of  denunciation  is  abroad.  With  some,  condemnation,  right  or 
wrong,  is  the  order  of  the  day.  No  matter  what  prudence  and  wisdom 
may  stamp  the  measures  of  the  administration,  no  matter  how  much  the 
prosperity  of  the  country  may  be  advanced,  or  what  public  evils  may  be 
averted,  under  its  guidance,  there  are  persons  who  would  make  general, 
indiscriminate,  and  interminable  opposition.  This  is  not  a  fit  occasion,  nor 
perhaps  am  I  a  fit  person,  to  enter  upon  a  vindication  of  its  measures.  But 
I  hope  I  shall  be  excused  for  asking  what  measure  of  domestic  policy  has 
been  proposed  or  recommended  by  the  present  executive,  which  has  not 
its  prototype  in  previous  acts  or  recommendations  of  administrations  at 
the  head  of  which  was  a  citizen  of  Viroiaia  ?  Can  the  liberal  and  hioh- 
minded  people  of  this  State  condemn  measures  emanating  from  a  citizen 
of  Massachusetts,  which,  when  proposed  by  a  Virginian,  commanded  their 
express  assent  or  silent  acquiescence,  or  to  which,  if  in  any  instance  they 
made  opposition,  it  was  respectful,  limited,  and  qualified  ?  The  present 
administration  desires  only  to  be  judged  by  its  measures,  and  invites  the 
strictest  scrutiny  and  the  most  watchful  vigilance  on  the  part  of  the  public. 

With  respect  to  the  Panama  mission,  it  is  true  that  it  was  not  recom- 
mended by  any  preceding  administration,  because  the  circumstances  of  the 
world  were  not  then  such  as  to  present  it  as  a  subject  for  discussion.  But 
during  that  of  Mr.  Monroe,  it  has  been  seen  that  it  wTas  a  matter  of  con- 
sideration, and  there  is  every  reason  to  believe,  if  he  were  now  at  the 
head  of  affairs,  his  determination  would  correspond  with  that  of  his  suc- 
cessor. Let  me  suppose  that  it  was  the  resolution  of  this  country,  under 
no  circumstances,  to  contract  with  foreign  powers  intimate  public  engage- 
ments, and  to  remain  altogether  unbound  by  any  treaties  of  alliance  ;  what 
should  have  been  the  course  taken  with  the  very  respectful  invitation  which 
was  given  to  the  United  States  to  be  represented  at  Panama  ?  Haughtily 
folding  your  arms,  would  you  have  given  it  a  cold  and  abrupt  refusal  ? 
Or  would  you  not  rather  accept  it,  send  ministers,  and  in  a  friendly  and 
respectful  manner,  endeavor  to  satisfy  those  who  are  looking  to  us  for 
counsel  and  example,  and  imitating  our  free  institutions,  that  there  is  no 
necessity  for  such  an  alliance  ;  that  the  dangers  which  alone  could,  in  the 
opinion  of  any  one,  have  justified  it,  have  vanished,  and  that  it  is  not 
good  for  them  or  for  us  ? 

What  may  be  the  nature  of  the  instructions  with  which  our  ministers 
may  be  charged,  it  is  not  proper  that  I  should  state  ;  but  all  candid  and 


326  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

reflecting  men  must  admit  that  we  have  great  interests  in  connection  with 
the  southern  republics,  independent  of  any  compacts  of  alliance.  Those 
republics,  now  containing  a  population  of  upward  of  twenty  millions, 
duplicating  their  numbers  probably  in  periods  still  shorter  than  we  do, 
comprising  within  their  limits  the  most  abundant  sources  of  the  precious 
metals,  offer  to  our  commerce,  to  our  manufactures,  to  our  naviga- 
tion, so  many  advantages,  that  none  can  doubt  the  expediency  of  culti- 
vating the  most  friendly  relations  with  them.  If  treaties  of  commerce 
and  friendship,  and  liberal  stipulations  in  respect  to  neutral  and  bel- 
ligerent rights,  could  be  negotiated  with  each  of  them  at  its  separate  seat 
of  government,  there  is  no  doubt  that  much  greater  facilities  for  the  con- 
clusion of  such  treaties  present  themselves  at  a  point  where,  all  being 
represented,  the  way  may  be  smoothed  and  all  obstacles  removed  by  a 
disclosure  of  the  views  and  wishes  of  all,  and  by  mutual  and  friendly 
explanations.  There  was  one  consideration  which  had  much  weight 
with  the  executive,  in  the  decision  to  accept  the  mission ;  and  that 
was  the  interest  which  this  country  has,  and  especially  the  southern 
States,  in  the  fate  and  fortunes  of  the  island  of  Cuba.  No  subject  of 
our  foreign  relations  has  created  with  the  executive  government  more 
anxious  concern,  than  that  of  the  condition  of  that  island  and  the  pos- 
sibility of  prejudice  to  the  southern  States,  from  the  convulsions  to 
which  it  might  be  exposed.  It  was  believed,  and  is  yet  believed,  that  the 
dangers  which,  in  certain  contingences,  might  threaten  our  quiet  and 
safety,  may  be  more  successfully  averted  at  a  place  at  which  all  the  Amer- 
ican powers  should  be  represented  than  anywhere  else.  And  I  have  no 
hesitation  in  expressing  the  firm  conviction  that,  if  there  be  one  section  of 
this  Union  more  than  all  others  interested  in  the  Panama  mission,  and  the 
benefits  which  may  flow  from  it,  that  section  is  the  South.  It  was,  there- 
fore, with  great  and  unaffected  surprise  that  I  witnessed  the  obliquity  of 
these  political  views  which  led  some  gentlemen  from  that  quarter  to  regard 
the  measure,  as  it  might  operate  on  the  southern  States,  in  an  unfavorable 
light.  Whatever  may  be  the  result  of  the  mission,  its  moral  effect  in 
Europe  will  be  considerable,  and  it  can  not  fail  to  make  the  most  friendly 
impressions  upon  our  southern  neighbors.  It  is  one  of  which  it  is  difficult, 
in  sober  imagination,  to  conceive  any  possible  mischievous  consequences, 
and  wdiich  the  executive  could  not  have  declined,  in  my  opinion,  Avithout 
culpable  neglect  of  the  interests  of  this  country,  and  without  giving  dis- 
satisfaction to  nations  whose  friendship  we  are  called  upon  by  every  dictate 
of  policy  to  conciliate. 

There  are  persons  who  would  impress  on  the  southern  States  the  belief 
that  they  have  just  cause  of  apprehending  danger  to  a  certain  portion  of 
their  property  from  the  present  administration.  It  is  not  difficult  to  com- 
prehend the  object  and  the  motive  of  these  idle  alarms.  What  measure 
of  the  present  administration  gives  any  just  occasion  for  the  smallest  ap- 
prehension to  the  tenure  by  which  that  species  of  property  Is  held  ?    How- 


ON    THE    PRESIDENTIAL    ELECTION    OF    1825.  327 

ever  much  the  president  and  the  members  of  his  administration  may 
deprecate  the  existence  of  slavery  among  us,  as  the  greatest  evil  with 
which  we  are  afflicted,  there  is  not  one  of  them  that  does  not  believe  that 
the  Constitution  of  the  general  government  confers  no  authority  to  inter- 
pose between  the  master  and  his  slave,  none  to  apply  an  adequate  remedy, 
if  indeed  there  be  any  remedy  within  the  scope  of  human  power.  Suppose 
an  object  of  these  alarmists  were  accomplished,  and  the  slaveholding 
States  were  united  in  the  sentiment,  that  the  policy  of  this  government,  in 
all  time  to  come,  should  be  regulated  on  the  basis  of  the  fact  of  slavery, 
would  not  union  on  the  one  side  lead  to  union  on  the  other  ?  And  would 
not  such  a  fatal  division  of  the  people  and  States  of  this  confederacy  pro- 
duce perpetual  mutual  irritation  and  exasperation,  and  ultimately  disunion 
itself?  The  slaveholding  States  can  not  forget  .that  they  are  now  in  a 
minority,  Avhich  is  in  a  constant  relative  diminution,  and  should  certainly 
not  be  the  first  to  put  forth  a  principle  of  public  action  by  which  they 
would  be  the  greatest  losers. 

I  am  but  too  sensible  of  the  unreasonable  trespass  on  your  time  which  I 
have  committed,  and  of  the  egotism  of  which  my  discourse  has  partaken. 
I  must  depend  for  my  apology  upon  the  character  of  the  times,  on  the 
venom  of  the  attacks  which  have  been  made  upon  my  character  and  con- 
duct, and  upon  the  generous  sympathy  of  the  gentlemen  here  assembled. 
During  this  very  journey  a  paper  has  been  put  into  my  hands  in  which  a 
member  of  the  House  of  Representatives  is  represented  to  have  said  that 
the  distinguished  individual  at  the  head  of  the  government,  and  myself, 
have  been  indicted  by  the  people.  If  that  is  the  case,  I  presume  that  some 
defense  is  lawful.  By-the-by,  if  the  honorable  member  is  to  have  the  sole 
conduct  of  the  prosecution  without  the  aid  of  other  counsel,  I  think  that  it 
is  not  difficult  to  predict  that  his  clients  will  be  nonsuited,  and  that  they 
will  be  driven  out  of  court  with  the  usual  judgment  pronounced  in  such 
cases. 

In  conclusion,  I  beg  leave  to  offer  a  toast  which,  if  you  are  as  dry  as  I 
am,  will,  I  hope,  be  acceptable  for  the  sake  of  the  wine  if  not  the  senti- 
ment : 

"  The  continuation  of  the  turnpike  road  which  passes  through  Lewis- 
burg,  and  success  to  the  cause  of  internal  improvement,  under  every 
auspice." 

He  then  took  his  seat  amid  the  repeated  cheers  of  the  whole  company. 


AFRICAN    COLONIZATION. 

AT  THE  ANNUAL  MEETING   OF   THE  AMERICAN   COLONIZATION   SO- 
CIETY, "WASHINGTON,  JANUARY  20    1827. 

[From  almost  the  first  start  of  African  Colonization,  Mr. 
Clay  took  an  interest  in  it,  and  that  interest  increased  to  the 
day  of  his  death.  He  was  for  many  years  president  of  the  So- 
ciety, and  never  failed  to  give  it  his  countenance  and  support 
when  he  could.  He  made  several  important  speeches  in  its  be- 
half, of  which  the  following  is  one.  He  has  incorporated  this 
scheme  in  his  project  of  emancipation  for  the  State  of  Ken- 
tucky, published  in  1849,  and  found  in  the  third  volume  of  this 
work.*  Mr.  Clay  was  never  a  man  to  think  that  slavery  must 
endure  forever  in  this  country.  Look  at  the  remarkable  pas- 
sages italicised  in  the  following  speech,  and  consider  the  stand 
he  took  in  the  Compromises  of  1850,  against  the  extension  of 
slavery.  He  would  go  as  far  as  the  farthest  for  the  constitu- 
tional rights  of  the  slave  States  ;  but  his  voice  and  feelings 
were  :  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no  further.  As  a  friend 
of  Colonization,  however,  he  would  never  consent  that  it  should 
interfere  with  slavery ;  but,  in  his  view,  the  simple  and  restricted 
mission  of  Colonization  was  to  operate  on  the  free  colored  pop- 
ulation, in  the  free  and  slave  States  ;  and  this  he  regarded  as 
beneficent  in  the  present  and  in  the  future. 

The  present  condition  and  prospects  of  the  Colony  of  Liberia 
(1856),  have  more  than  realized  the  most  sanguine  hopes  of  Mr. 
Clay  and  others  in  the  early  stages  of  its  history.  It  has  a  dis- 
tinct and  recognized  political  existence  among  nations,  and  is  as 
likely  to  rise  and  increase  in  importance  as  any  State  that  is  yet 
in  a  small  beginning.  It  has  all  the  elements  of  growth  and 
importance,  with  the  moral  advantage  of  the  favor  of  the  civil- 
ized world.  No  Christian  nation  would  plant  any  obstacle  in 
the  way  of  its  progress ;  and  with  such  a  start,  in  such  circum- 
stances, it  can  not  fail   to  become  a  bright  spot  of  Christian 

*  Last  Seven  Years  of  the  Life  of  Henry  Clay,  page  346. 


ON    AFRICAN    COLONIZATION.  329 

civilization  and  of  freedom  on  the  western  coast  of  Africa — des- 
tined, no  doubt,  to  extend  its  benign  influence  widely  over  that 
Continent.] 

Mr.  Clay  said  :  I  can  not  withhold  the  expression  of  my  congratula- 
tions to  the  Society,  on  account  of  the  very  valuable  acquisition  which  we 
have  obtained  in  the  eloquent  gentleman  from  Boston  (Mr.  Knapp),  who 
has  just  before  favored  us  with  an  address.  He  has  told  us  of  his  original 
impressions,  unfavorable  to  the  object  of  the  Society,  and  of  his  subsequent 
conversion.  If  the  same  industry,  investigation,  and  unbiased  judgment, 
manifested  by  himself  and  another  gentleman  (Mr.  Powell),  who  avowed 
at  the  last  meeting  of  the  Society  a  similar  change  wrought  in  his  mind, 
were  carried  by  the  public  at  large,  into  the  consideration  of  the  plan  of 
the  Society,  the  conviction  of  its  utility  would  be  universal. 

I  have  arisen  to  submit  a  resolution,  in  behalf  of  which  I  would  bespeak 
the  favor  of  the  Society.  But  before  I  offer  any  observations  in  its  sup- 
port, I  must  say  that,  whatever  part  I  shall  take  in  the  proceedings  of  this 
Society,  whatever  opinions  or  sentiments  I  may  utter,  they  are  exclusively 
my  own.  Whether  they  are  worth  any  thing  or  not,  no  one  but  myself 
is  at  all  responsible  for  them.  I  have  consulted  with  no  person  out  of 
this  Society,  and  I  have  especially  abstained  from  all  communication  or 
consultation  with  any  one  to  whom  I  stand  in  any  official  relation.  My 
judgment  on  the  object  of  this  Society  has  been  long  since  deliberately 
formed.  The  conclusions  to  which,  after  much  and  anxious  consideration, 
my  mind  has  been  brought,  have  been  neither  produced  nor  refuted,  by 
the  official  station,  the  duties  of  which  have  been  confided  to  me. 

From  the  origin  of  this  Society,  every  member  of  it  has,  I  believe, 
looked  forward  to  the  arrival  of  a  period,  when  it  would  become  necessary 
to  invoke  the  public  aid  in  the  execution  of  the  great  scheme  which  it  was 
instituted  to  promote.  Considering  itself  as  the  mere  pioneer  in  the  cause 
which  it  had  undertaken,  it  was  well  aware  that  it  could  do  no  more  than 
remove  preliminary  difficulties,  and  point  out  a  sure  road  to  ultimate  suc- 
cess ;  and  that  the  public  only  could  supply  that  regular,  steady,  and  effi- 
cient support,  to  which  the  gratuitous  means  of  benevolent  individuals 
would  be  found  incompetent.  My  surprise  has  been,  that  the  Society  has 
been  able  so  long  to  sustain  itself,  and  to  do  so  much  upon  the  charitable 
contributions  of  good,  and  pious,  and  enlightened  men,  whom  it  has  hap- 
pily found  in  all  parts  of  our  country.  But  our  work  has  so  prospered 
and  grown  under  our  hands,  that  the  appeal  to  the  power  and  resources 
of  the  public,  should  be  no  longer  deferred.  The  resolution  which  I  have 
risen  to  propose,  contemplates  this  appeal.     It  is  in  the  following  words : 

"Resolved,  that  the  board  of  managers  be  empowered  and  directed,  at 
such  time  or  times  as  may  seem  to  them  expedient,  to  make  respectful  ap- 
plication to  the  Cougress  of  the  United  States,  and  to  the  Legislatures  of 


330  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

the  different  States,  for  such  pecuniary  aid,  in  futherance  of  the  object  of 
this  Society,  as  they  may  respectively  be  pleased  to  grant." 

In  soliciting  the  countenance  and  support  of  the  Legislatures  of  the 
Union  and  States,  it  is  incumbent  on  the  Society,  in  making  out  its  case,  to 
show,  first,  that  it  offers  to  their  consideration  a  scheme  which  is  practic- 
able, and  secondly,  that  the  execution  of  the  practicable  scheme,  partial  or 
entire,  will  be  fraught  with  such  beneficial  consequences  as  to  merit  the 
support  which  is  solicited.     I  believe  both  points  to  be  maintainable. 

First,  it  is  now  a  little  upward  of  ten  years  since  a  religious,  amiable, 
and  benevolent  resident  of  this  city,  first  conceived  the  idea  of  planting  a 
colony,  from  the  United  States,  of  free  people  of  color,  on  the  western 
shores  of  Africa.  He  is  no  more,  and  the  noblest  eulogy  which  could  be 
pronounced  on  him  would  be,  to  inscribe  upon  his  tomb,  the  merited 
epitaph,  "  Here  lies  the  projector  of  the  American  Colonization  Society." 

Among  others,  to  whom  he  communicated  the  project,  was  the  person 
who  now  has  the  honor  of  addressing  you.  My  first  impessions,  like  those 
of  all  who  have  not  fully  investigated  the  subject,  were  against  it.  They 
yielded  to  his  earnest  persuasions  and  my  own  reflections,  and  I  finally 
agreed  with  him  that  the  experiment  was  worthy  of  a  fair  trial.  A  meet- 
ing of  its  friends  was  called,  organized  as  a  deliberative  body,  and  a  Constitu- 
tion was  formed.  The  Society  went  into  operation.  He  lived  to  see  the 
most  encouraging  progress  in  its  exertions,  and  died  in  full  confidence  of 
its  complete  success.*  The  Society  was  scarcely  formed  before  it  was  ex- 
posed to  the  derision  of  the  unthinking  ;  pronounced  to  be  visionary  and 
chimerical  by  those  who  were  capable  of  adopting  wiser  opinions,  and  the 
most  confident  predictions  of  its  entire  failure  were  put  forth.  It  found 
itself  equally  assailed  by  the  two  extremes  of  public  sentiment  in  regard 
to  our  African  population.  According  to  one  (that  rash  class  which, 
without  a  due  estimate  of  the  fatal  consequence,  would  forthwith  issue  a 
decree  of  general,  immediate,  and  indiscriminate  emancipation),  it  was  a 
scheme  of  the  slaveholder  to  perpetuate  slavery.  The  other  (that  class 
which  believes  slavery  a  blessing,  and  which  trembles  with  aspen  sensibil- 
ity at  the  appearance  of  the  most  distant  and  ideal  danger  to  the  tenure  by 
which  that  description  of  property  is  held),  declared  it  a  contrivance  to  let 
loose  on  society  all  the  slaves  of  the  country,  ignorant,  uneducated,  and 
incapable  of  appreciating  the  value  or  enjoying  the  privileges  of  freedom. 
The  Society  saw  itself  surrounded  by  every  sort  of  embarrassment.  What 
great  human  enterprise  was  ever  undertaken  without  difficulty  ?  What 
ever  failed,  within  the  compass  of  human  power,  when  pursued  with  per- 
severance and  blessed  by  the  smiles  of  Providence  ?  The  Society  prose- 
cuted undismayed  its  great  work,  appealing  for  succor  to  the  moderate,  the 
reasonable,  the  virtuous,  and  religious  portions  of  the  public.     It  protested, 

*  Mr.  Caldwell.  The  Rev.  Robert  Finley,  of  New  Jersey,  was  the  first  mover  in 
African  Colonization,  and  Mr.  Caldwell  was  chieflv  instrumental  in  the  organization 
of  the  Society. 


ON    AFRICAN    COLONIZATION.  331 

from  the  commencement,  and  throughout  all  its  progress,  and  it  now  pro- 
tests, that  it  entertains  no  purpose,  on  its  own  authority  or  by  its  own 
means,  to  attempt  emancipation,  partial  or  general ;  that  it  knows  the  gen- 
eral government  has  no  constitutional  power  to  achieve  such  an  object; 
that  it  believes  that  the  States,  and  the  States  only,  which  tolerate  slavery, 
can  accomplish  the  work  of  emancipation  ;  and  that  it  ought  to  be  left  to 
them,  exclusively,  absolutely,  and  voluntarily,  to  decide  the  question. 

The  object  of  the  Society  was  the  colonization  of  the  free  colored  people, 
not  the  slaves,  of  the  country.  Voluntary  in  its  institution,  voluntary  in 
its  continuance,  voluntary  in  all  its  ramifications,  all  its  means,  purposes, 
and  instruments,  are  also  voluntary,  But  it  was  said  that  no  free  colored 
persons  could  be  prevailed  upon  to  abandon  the  comforts  of  civilized  life 
and  expose  themselves  to  all  the  perils  of  a  settlement  in  a  distant,  inhos- 
pitable, and  savage  country ;  that,  if  they  could  be  induced  to  go  on  such 
a  quixotic  expedition,  no  territory  could  be  procured  for  their  establishment 
as  a  colony  ;  that  the  plan  was  altogether  incompetent  to  effectuate  its  pro- 
fessed object ;  and  that  it  ought  to  be  rejected  as  the  idle  dream  of  vision- 
ary enthusiasts.  The  Society  has  outlived,  thank  God,  all  these  disastrous 
predictions.  It  has  survived  to  swell  the  list  of  false  prophets.  It  is  no 
longer  a  question  of  speculation  whether  a  colony  can  or  can  not  be  plant- 
ed from  the  United  States  of  free  persons  of  color  on  the  shores  of  Africa. 
It  is  a  matter  demonstrated ;  such  a  colony,  in  fact,  exists,  prospers,  has 
made  successful  war,  and  honorable  peace,  and  transacts  all  the  multiplied 
business  of  a  civilized  and  Christian  community.  It  now  has  about  five 
hundred  souls,  disciplined  troops,  forts,  and  other  means  of  defense,  sover- 
eignty over  an  extensive  territory,  and  exerts  a  powerful  and  salutary  in- 
fluence over  the  neighboring  clans. 

[Numbers  of  the  free  African  race  among  us  are  willing  to  go  to  Africa. 
The  Society  has  never  experienced  any  difficulty  on  that  subject,  except 
that  its  means  of  comfortable  transportation  have  been  inadequate  to  ac- 
commodate all  who  have  been  anxious  to  migrate.  Why  should  they  not 
go  ?  Here  they  are  in  the  lowest  state  of  social  gradation  ;  aliens — polit- 
ical, moral,  social  aliens — strangers,  though  natives.  There,  they  would  be 
in  the  midst  of  their  friends,  and  their  kindred,  at  home,  though  born  in  a 
foreign  land,  and  elevated  above  the  natives  of  the  country,  as  much  as  they 
are  degraded  here  below  the  other  classes  of  the  community.  But  on  this 
matter,  I  am  happy  to  have  it  in  ray  power  to  furnish  indisputable  evidence 
from  the  most  authentic  source,  that  of  large  numbers  of  free  persons  of 
color  themselvesj  Numerous  meetings  have  been  held  in  several  churches 
in  Baltimore,  of  the  free  people  of  color,  in  which,  after  being  organized  as 
deliberative  assemblies,  by  the  appointment  of  a  chairman  (if  not  of  the 
same  complexion)  presiding  as  you,  Mr.  Vice-president,  do,  and  secretaries, 
they  have  voted  memorials  addressed  to  the  white  people,  in  which  they 
have  argued  the  question  with  an  ability,  moderation,  and  temper,  surpass- 
ing any  that  I  can  command,  and   emphatically  recommended  the  colony 


332  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

of  Liberia  to  favorable  consideration,  as  the  most  desirable  and  practicable 
scheme  ever  yet  presented  on  this  interesting  subject.  I  ask  permission  of 
the  Society  to  read  this  highly  creditable  document. 

[Here  Mr.  Clay  read  the  memorial  referred  to.] 

The  Society  has  experienced  no  difficulty  in  the  acquisition  of  a  territory, 
upon  reasonable  terms,  abundantly  sufficient  for  a  most  extensive  colony. 
And  land  in  ample  quantities,  it  has  ascertained,  can  be  procured  in  Africa, 
together  with  all  rights  of  sovereignty,  upon  conditions  as  favorable  as 
those  on  which  the  United  States  extinguish  the  Indian  title  to  territory 
within  their  own  limits. 

\fn  respect  to  the  alleged  incompetency  of  the  scheme  to  accomplish  its 
professed  objects,  the  Society  asks  that  that  object  should  be  taken  to  be, 
not  what  the  imaginations  of  its  enemies  represent  it  to  be,  but  what  it 
really  proposes.  They  represent  that  the  purpose  of  the  Society  is,  to  ex- 
port the  whole  African  population  of  the  United  States,  bond  and  free  ;  and 
they  pronounce  this  design  to  be  unattainable.  They  declare  that  the 
means  of  the  whole  country  are  insufficient  to  affect  the  transportation  to 
Africa  of  a  mass  of  population  approximating  to  two  million  of  souls. 
Agreed  ;  but  that  is  not  what  the  Society  contemplates.  They  have  substi- 
tuted their  own  notion  for  that  of  the  Society.  What  is  the  true  nature  of 
the  evil  of  the  existence  of  a  portion  of  the  African  race  in  our  population  ? 
It  is  not  that  there  are  some,  but  that  there  are  so  many  among  us  of  a 
different  caste,  of  a  different  physical,  if  not  moral,  constitution,  who  never 
can  amalgate  with  the  great  body  of  our  population.  In  every  country,  per- 
sons are  to  be  found  varying  iu  their  color,  origin,  and  character,  from  the 
native  mass.  But  this  anomaly  creates  no  inquietude  or  apprehension,  be- 
cause the  exotics,  from  the  smallness  of  their  number,  are  known  to  be 
utterly  incapable  of  disturbing  the  general  tranquillity.  Here,  on  the 
contrary,  the  African  part  of  our  population  bears  so  large  a  proportion  to 
the  residue,  of  European  origin,  as  to  create  the  most  lively  apprehension, 
especially  in  some  quarters  of  the  Union.  Any  project,  therefore,  by  which, 
in  a  material  degree,  the  dangerous  element  in  the  general  mass,  can  be  di- 
minished or  rendered  stationary,  deserves  deliberate  consideration^ 

The  Colonization  Society  has  never  imagined  it  to  be  practicable,  or  with- 
in the  reach  of  any  means  which  the  several  governments  of  the  Union  could 
bring  to  bear  on  the  subject,  to  transport  the  whole  of  the  African  race 
within  the  limits  of  the  United  States.  Nor  is  that  necessary  to  accomplish 
the  desirable  objects  of  domestic  tranquillity,  and  render  us  one  homoge- 
neous people.  The  population  of  the  United  States  has  been  supposed  to 
duplicate  in  periods  of  twenty-five  years.  That  may  have  been  the  case 
heretofore,  but  the  terms  of  duplication  will  be  more  and  more  protracted 
as  we  advance  in  national  age  ;  and  I  do  not  believe  that  it  will  be  found, 
iu  any  period  to  come,  that  our  numbers  will  be  doubled  in  a  less  term 
than  one  of  about  thirty-three  and  a  third  years.     I  have  not  time  to  entei 


ON    AFRICAN    COLONIZATION.  333 

now  into  details  in  support  of  this  opinion.  They  would  consist  of  those 
checks  which  experience  has  shown  to  obstruct  the  progress  of  population, 
arising  out  of  its  actual  augmentation  and  density,  the  settlement  of  waste 
lands,  etc.  Assuming  the,  period  of  thirty-three  and  a  third,  or  any  other 
number  of  years,  to  be  that  in  Avhich  our  population  will  hereafter  be 
doubled,  if,  during  that  whole  term,  the  capital  of  the  African  stock  could 
be  kept  down,  or  statiouary,  while  that  of  European  origin  should  be  left 
to  an  unobstructed  increase,  the  result,  at  the  end  of  the  term,  would  be 
most  propitious.  Let  us  suppose,  for  example,  that  the  whole  population 
at  present  of  the  United  States,  is  twelve  millions,  of  which  ten  may  be  es- 
timated of  the  Anglo-Saxon,  and  two  of  the  African  race.  If  there  could 
be  annually  transported  from  the  United  States  an  amount  of  the  African 
portion  equal  to  the  annual  increase  of  the  whole  of  that  caste,  while  the 
European  race  should  be  left  to  multiply,  we  should  find  at  the  termination 
of  the  period  of  duplication,  whatever  it  may  be,  that  the  relative  propor- 
tions would  be  as  twenty  to  two.  And  if  the  process  were  continued,  dur- 
ing a  second  term  of  duplication,  the  proportion  would  be  as  forty  to  two 
— one  which  would  eradicate  every  cause  of  alarm  or  solicitude  from  the 
breasts  of  the  most  timid.  But  the  transportation  of  Africans,  by  creating, 
to  the  extent  to  which  it  might  be  carried,  a  vacuum  in  society,  would 
tend  to  accelerate  the  duplication  of  the  European  race,  who  by  all  the 
laws  of  population,  would  fill  up  the  void  space. 

This  Society  is  well  aware,  I  repeat,  that  they  can  not  touch  the  subject 
of  slavery.  But  it  is  no  objection  to  their  scheme,  limited,  as  it  is,  exclu- 
sively to  those  free  people  of  color  who  are  willing  to  migrate,  that  it  ad- 
mits of  indefinite  extension  and  application,  by  those  who  alone,  having  the 
competent  authority,  may  choose  to  adopt  and  apply  it.  Our  object  has 
been  to  point  out  the  way,  to  show  that  colonization  is  practicable,  and  to 
leave  it  to  those  States  or  individuals  who  may  be  pleased  to  engage  in  the 
object,  to  prosecute  it.  We  have  demonstrated  that  a  colony  may  be 
planted  in  Africa,  by  the  fact  that  an  American  colony  there  exists.  The 
problem  which  has  so  long  and  so  deeply  interested  the  thoughts  of  good 
and  patriotic  men,  is  solved ;  a  country  and  a  home  have  been  found,  to 
which  the  African  race  may  be  sent,  to  the  promotion  of  their  happiness 
and  our  own. 

But,  Mr.  Vice-president,  I  shall  not  rest  contented  with  the  fact  of  the 
establishment  of  the  colony,  conclusive  as  it  ought  to  be  deemed,  of  the 
practicability  of  our  purpose.  I  shall  proceed  to  show,  by  reference  to  indis- 
putable statistical  details  and  calculations,  that  it  is  within  the  compass  of 
reasonable  human  means.  I  am  sensible  of  the  tediousness  of  all  arithmet- 
ical data,  but  I  will  endeavor  to  simplify  them  as  much  as  possible.  It 
will  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  aim  of  the  Society  is,  to  establish  in  Africa 
a  colony  of  the  free  African  population  of  the  United  States,  to  an  extent 
which  shall  be  beneficial  both  to  Africa  and  America.  The  whole  free 
colored  population  of  the  United  States,  amounted,  in  1790,  to  fifty-nine 


334  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

thousand  four  hundred  and  eighty-one,  in  1800,  to  one  hundred  and  ten 
thousand  and  seventy-two;  in  1810,  to  one  hundred  and  eighty-six  thou- 
sand four  hundred  and  forty -six ;  and  in  1820,  to  two  hundred  and  thirty- 
three  thousand  five  hundred  and  thirty.  The  ratio  of  annual  increase 
durino-  the  first  term  of  ten  years,  was  about  eight  and  a  half  per  cent,  per 
annum  ;  during  the  second,  about  seven  per  cent,  per  annum  ;  and  during 
the  third,  a  little  more  than  two  and  a  half.  The  very  great  difference  in 
the  rate  of  annual  increase,  during  those  several  terms,  may  probably  be 
accounted  for  by  the  effect  of  the  number  of  voluntary  emancipations  ope- 
rating with  more  influence  upon  the  total  smaller  amount  of  free  colored 
persons  at  the  first  of  those  periods,  and  by  the  facts  of  the  insurrection  in 
St.  Domingo,  and  the  acquisition  of  Louisiana,  both  of  which,  occurring 
during  the  first  and  second  terms,  added  considerably  to  the  number  of  our 
free  colored  population. 

Of  all  descriptions  of  our  population,  that  of  the  free  colored,  taken  in 
the  aggregate,  is  the  least  prolific,  because  of  the  checks  arising  from  vice 
and  want.  During  the  ten  years,  between  1810  and  1820,  when  no  ex- 
traneous causes  existed  to  prevent  a  fair  competition  in  the  increase  be- 
tween the  slave  and  the  free  African  race,  the  former  increased  at  the  rate 
of  nearly  three  per  cent,  per  annum,  while  the  latter  did  not  much  exceed 
.two  and  a  half.  Hereafter  it  may  safely  be  assumed,  and  I  venture  to  pre- 
dict will  not  be  contradicted  by  the  return  of  the  next  census,  that  the  in- 
crease of  the  free  black  population  will  not  surpass  two  and  a  half  per  cent, 
per  annum.  Their  amount  at  the  last  census  being  two  hundred  and 
thirty-three  thousand  five  hundred  and  thirty,  for  the  sake  of  round  num- 
bers, their  annual  increase  may  be  assumed  to  be  six  thousand,  at  the 
present  time.  Now  if  this  number  could  be  annually  transported  from  the 
United  States  during  a  term  of  years,  it  is  evident  that,  at  the  end  of  that 
term,  the  parent  capital  will  not  have  increased,  but  will  have  been  kept 
down  at  least  to  what  it  was  at  the  commencement  of  the  term.  Is  it  prac- 
ticable, then,  to  colonize  annually  six  thousand  persons  from  the  United 
States,  without  materially  impairing  or  affecting  any  of  the  great  interests 
of  the  United  States  ?  This  is  the  question  presented  to  the  judgments  of 
the  legislative  authorities  of  our  country.  This  is  the  whole  scheme  of  the 
Society.  From  its  actual  experience,  derived  from  the  expenses  which  have 
been  incurred  in  transporting  the  persons  already  sent  to  Africa,  the  entire 
average  expense  of  each  colonist,  young  and  old,  including  passage-money 
and  subsistence,  may  be  stated  at  twenty  dollars  per  head.  There  is  reason 
to  believe  that  it  may  be  reduced  considerably  below  that  sum.  Estimat- 
ing that  to  be  the  expense,  the  total  cost  of  transporting  six  thousand  souls, 
annually  to  Africa,  would  be  one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  dollars. 
The  tonnage  requisite  to  effect  the  object,  calculating  two  persons  to  every 
five  tons  (which  is  the  provision  of  existing  law)  would  be  fifteen  thousand 
tons.  But  as  each  vessel  could  probably  make  two  voyages  in  the  year,  it 
may  be  reduced  to  seven  thousand  five  hundred.     And  as  both  our  iner- 


ON    AFKICAN    COLONIZATION.  335 

cantile  and  military  marine  might  be  occasionally  employed  on  this  col- 
lateral service,  without  injury  to  the  main  object  of  the  voyage,  a  further 
abatement  might  be  safely  made  in  the  aggregate  amount  of  the  necessary 
tonnage.  The  navigation  concerned  in  the  commerce  between  the  colony 
and  the  United  States  (and  it  already  begins  to  supply  subjects  of  an  in- 
teresting trade)  might  be  incidentally  employed  to  the  same  end. 

Is  the  annual  expenditure  of  a  sum  no  larger  than  one  hundred  and 
twenty  thousand  dollars,  and  the  annual  employment  of  seven  thousand  five 
hundred  tons  of  shipping  too  much  for  reasonable  exertion,  considering 
the  magnitude  of  the  object  in  view  ?  Are  they  not,  on  the  contrary, 
within  the  compass  of  moderate  efforts  ? 

Here  is  the  whole  scheme  of  the  Society — a  project  which  has  been 
pronounced  visionary  by  those  who  have  never  given  themselves  the 
trouble  to  examine  it,  but  to  which  I  believe  most  unbiased  men  will  yield 
their  cordial  assent,  after  they  have  investigated  it. 

Limited  as  the  project  is,  by  the  Society,  to  a  colony  to  be  formed  by 
the  free  and  unconstrained  consent  of  free  persons  of  color,  it  is  no  ob- 
jection, but,  on  the  contrary,  a  great  recommendation  of  the  plan,  that  it 
admits  of  being  taken  up  and  applied  on  a  scale  of  much  more  compre- 
hensive utility.  The  Society  knows,  and  it  affords  just  cause  of  felicitation, 
that  all,  or  any  one  of  the  States  which  tolerate  slavery,  may  carry  the 
scheme  of  colonization  into  effect  in  regard  to  the  slaves  within  their  re- 
spective limits,  and  thus  ultimately  rid  themselves  of  a  universally  ackowl- 
edged  curse.  A  reference  to  the  results  of  the  several  enumerations  of  the 
population  of  the  United  States  will  incontestably  proye  the  practicability 
of  its  application  on  the  more  extensive  scale.  The  slave  population  of 
the  United  States  amounted,  in  1790,  to  six  hundred  and  ninety-seven 
thousand,  six  hundred  and  ninety-seven;  in  1800,  to  eight  hundred  and 
ninety-six  thousand,  eight  hundred  and  forty-nine;  in  1810,  to  eleven  hun- 
dred and  ninety-one  thousand,  three  hundred  and  sixty-four;  and  in  1820, 
to  fifteen  hundred  and  thirty-eight  thousand,  one  hundred  and  twenty- 
eight.  The  rate  of  annual  increase  (rejecting  fractions  and  taking  the  in- 
teger to  which  they  made  the  nearest  approach),  during  the  first  term  of 
ten  years,  was  not  quite  three  per  centum  per  annum  ;  during  the  second, 
a  little  more  than  three  per  centum  per  annum ;  and  during  the  third  a 
little  less  than  three  per  centum.  The  mean  ratio  of  increase  for  the 
whole  period  of  thirty  years  was  very  little  more  than  three  per  centum 
per  annum.  During  the  first  two  periods,  the  native  stock  was  augmented 
by  importations  from  Africa  in  those  States  which  continued  to  tolerate 
them,  and  by  the  acquisition  of  Louisiana.  Virginia,  to  her  eternal  honor, 
abolished  the  abominable  traffic  among  the  earliest  acts  of  her  self-govern- 
ment. The  last  term  alone  presents  the  natural  increase  of  the  capital  unaf- 
fected by  any  extraneous  causes.  That  authorizes,  as  a  safe  assumption,  that 
the  future  increase  will  not  exceed  three  per  centum  per  annum.  As  our 
population  increases  the  value  of  slave-labor  will  diminish,  in  consequence  of 


336  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

tbe  superior  advantages  in  the  employment  of  free  labor.  And  when  the 
value  of  slave-labor  shall  be  materially  lessened,  either  by  the  multiplica- 
tion of  the  supply  of  slaves  beyond  the  demand,  or  by  the  competition  be- 
tween slave  and  free  labor,  the  annual  increase  of  slaves  will  be  reduced, 
in  consequence  of  the  abatement  of  the  motives  to  provide  for  and  rear  the 
offspring. 

Assuming  the  future  increase  to  be  at  the  rate  of  three  per  centum  per 
annum,  the  annual  addition  to  the  number  of  slaves  in  the  United  States, 
calculated  upon  the  return  of  the  last  census  (one  million  five  hundred 
and  thirty-eight  thousand,  one  hundred  and  twenty-eight),  is  forty -six 
thousand.  Applying  the  data  which  have  been  already  stated  and  ex- 
plained, in  relation  to  the  colonization  of  free  persons  of  color  from  the 
United  States  to  Africa,  to  the  aggregate  annual  increase,  both  bond  and 
free,  of  the  African  race,  and  the  result  will  be  found  most  encouraging. 
The  total  number  of  the  annual  increase  of  both  descriptions  is  fifty-two 
thousand.  The  total  expense  of  transporting  that  number  to  Africa  (sup- 
posing no  reduction  of  present  prices),  would  be  one  million  and  forty 
thousand  dollars,  and  the  requisite  amount  of  tonnage  would  be  only  one 
hundred  and  thirty  thousand  tons  of  shipping — about  one  ninth  part  of 
the  mercantile  marine  of  the  United  States.  Upon  the  supposition  of  a 
vessel's  making  two  voyages  in  the  year,  it  would  be  reduced  to  one  half, 
sixty-five  thousand.  Aud  this  quantity  would  be  still  further  reduced,  by 
embracing  opportunities  of  incidental  employment  of  vessels  belonging 
both  to  the  mercantile  and  military  marines. 

But,  is  the  annual  application  of  one  million  and  forty  thousand  dollars, 
and  the  employment  of  sixty-five  or  even  one  hundred  and  thirty  thousand 
tons  of  shipping,  considering  the  magnitude  of  the  object,  beyond  the 
ability  of  this  country  ?  Is  there  a  patriot,  looking  forward  to  its  domes- 
tic quiet,  its  happiness,  and  its  glory,  that  would  not  cheerfully  contribute 
his  proportion  of  the  burden,  to  accomplish  a  purpose  so  great  and  so 
humane  ?  During  the  general  continuance  of  the  African  slave-trade, 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  slaves  have  been,  in  a  single  year,  imported  into 
the  several  countries  whose  laws  authorized  their  admission.  Notwithstand- 
ing the  vigilance  of  the  powers  now  engaged  to  suppress  the  slave-trade, 
I  have  received  information,  that  in  a  single  year,  in  the  single  island  of 
Cuba,  slaves  equal  in  amount  to  one  half  of  the  above  number  of  fifty-two 
thousand,  have  been  illicitly  introduced.  Is  it  possible  that  those  who  are 
concerned  in  an  infamous  traffic  can  effect  more  than  the  States  of  this 
Union,  if  they  were  seriously  to  engage  in  the  good  work?  Is  it  credible, 
is  it  not  a  libel  upon  humau  nature  to  suppose,  that  the  triumphs  of  fraud, 
and  violence,  and  iniquity,  can  surpass  those  of  virtue,  and  benevolence, 
and  humanity  ? 

The  population  of  the  United  States  being,  at  this  time,  estimated  at 
about  ten  millions  of  the  European  race,  and  two  of  the  African,  on  the 
supposition  of  the  annual  colonization  of  a  number  of  the  latter,  equal  to 


ON    AFRICAN    COLONIZATION.  337 

the  annual  increase,  of  both  of  its  classes,  during  the  whole  period  neces- 
sary to  the  process  of  duplication  of  our  numbers,  they  would,  at  the  end 
of  that  period,  relatively  stand  twenty  millions  for  the  white  and  two  for 
the  black  portion.  But  an  annual  exportation  of  a  number  equal  to  the 
annual  increase,  at  the  beginning  of  the  term,  and  persevered  in  to  the 
end  of  it,  would  accomplish  more  than  to  keep  the  parent  stock  stationary. 
The  colonists  would  comprehend  more  than  an  equal  proportion  of  those 
of  the  prolific  ages.  Few  of  those  who  had  passed  that  age  would 
migrate.  So  that  the  annual  increase  of  those  left  behind,  would  continue 
gradually,  but  at  first  insensibly,  to  diminish  ;  and  by  the  expiration  of  the 
period  of  duplication,  it  would  be  found  to  have  materially  abated.  But 
it  is  not  merely  the  greater  relative  safety  and  happiness  which  would,  at 
the  termination  of  that  period,  be  the  condition  of  the  whites.  Their  abil- 
ity to  give  further  stimulus  to  the  cause  of  colonization  will  have  been 
doubled,  while  the  subjects  on  which  it  would  have  to  operate,  will  have 
decreased  or  remained  stationary.  If  the  business  of  colonization  should 
be  regularly  continued,  during  two  periods  of  duplication,  at  the  end  of 
the  second,  the  whites  would  stand  to  the  blacks,  as  forty  millions  to  not 
more  than  two,  while  the  same  ability  will  have  been  quadrupled.  Even 
if  colonization  should  then  altogether  cease,  the  proportion  of  the  African 
to  the  European  race  will  be  so  small,  that  the  most  timid  may  then,  for- 
ever, dismiss  all  ideas  of  danger  from  within  or  without,  on  account  of 
that  incongruous  and  perilous  element  in  our  population. 

Further ;  by  the  annual  withdrawal  of  fifty-two  thousand  persons  of 
color,  there  would  be  annual  space  created  for  an  equal  number  of  the 
white  race.  The  period,  therefore,  of  the  duplication  of  the  whites,  by  the 
laws  which  govern  population,  would  be  accelerated. 

Such,  Mr.  Vice-president,  is  the  project  of  the  Society ;  and  such  is  the 
extension  and  use  which  may  be  made  of  the  principle  of  colonization, 
in  application  to  our  slave  population,  by  those  States  which  are  alone 
competent  to  undertake  and  execute  it.  All,  or  any  one,  of  the  States 
which  tolerate  slavery,  may  adopt  and  execute  it,  by  co-operation  or 
separate  exertion.  If  I  could  be  instrumental  in  eradicating  this  deepest 
stain  upon  the  character  of  our  country,  and  removing  all  cause  of  re- 
proach on  account  of  it,  by  foreign  nations  ;  if  I  could  only  be  instru- 
mental in  ridding  of  this  foul  blot  that  revered  State  that  gave  me  birth,  or 
that  not  less  beloved  State  which  kindly  adopted  me  as  her  son  ;  I  would 
not  exchange  the  proud  satisfaction  which  I  should  enjoy,  for  the  honor  of 
all  the  triumphs  ever  decreed  to  the  most  successful  conqueror. 

Having,  I  hope,  shown  that  the  plan  of  the  Society  is  not  visionary, 
but  rational  and  practicable ;  that  a  colony  does  in  fact  exist,  planted 
under  its  auspices  ;  that  free  people  are  willing  and  anxious  to  go  ;  and 
that  the  right  of  soil  as  well  as  of  sovereignty,  may  be  acquired  in  vast 
tracts  of  country  in  Africa,  abundantly  sufficient  for  all  the  purposes  of  the 
most  ample  colony,  and  at  prices  almost  only  nominal,  the  task  which  re- 

22 


338  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

mains  to  me  of  showing  the  beneficial  consequences  which  would  attend 
the  execution  of  the  scheme,  is  comparatively  easy. 

Of  the  utility  of  a  total  separation  of  the  two  incongruous  portions  of 
our  population,  supposing  it  to  be  practicable,  none  have  ever  doubted. 
The  mode  of  accomplishing  that  most  desirable  object,  has  alone  divided 
public  opinion.  Colonization  in  Hayti,  for  a  time,  had  its  partisans. 
Without  throwing  any  impediments  in  the  way  of  executing  that  scheme, 
the  American  Colonization  Society  has  steadily  adhered  to  its  own.  The 
Haytien  project  has  passed  away.  Colonization  beyond  the  Stony  Mount- 
ains has  sometimes  been  proposed  ;  but  it  would  be  attended  with  an  ex- 
pense and  difficulties  far  surpassing  the  African  project,  while  it  would  not 
unite  the  same  animating  motives.  There  is  a  moral  fitness  in  the  idea  of 
returning  to  Africa  her  children,  whose  ancestors  have  been  torn  from  her 
by  the  ruthless  hand  of  fraud  and  violence.  Transplanted  in  a  foreign 
land,  they  will  carry  back  to  their  soil  the  rich  fruits  of  religion,  civiliza- 
tion, law,  and  liberty.  May  it  not  be  one  of  the  great  designs  of  the 
Ruler  of  the  universe  (whose  ways  are  often  inscrutable  by  short-sighted 
mortals)  thus  to  transform  an  original  crime  into  a  signal  blessing,  to  that 
most  unfortunate  portion  of  the  globe.  Of  all  classes  of  our  population,  the 
most  vicious  is  that  of  the  free  colored.  It  is  the  inevitable  result  of  their 
moral,  political,  and  civil  degradation.  Contaminated  themselves,  they 
extend  their  vices  to  all  around  them,  to  the  slaves  and  to  the  whites.  If 
the  principle  of  colonization  should  be  confined  to  them ;  if  a  colony  can 
be  firmly  established  and  successfully  continued  in  Africa  which  should 
draw  off  annually  an  amount  of  that  portion  of  our  population  equal  to 
its  annual  increase,  much  good  will  be  done.  If  the  principle  be  adopted 
and  applied  by  the  States,  whose  laws  sanction  the  existence  of  slavery,  to 
an  extent  equal  to  the  annual  increase  of  slaves,  still  greater  good  will  be 
done.  This  good  will  be  felt  by  the  Africans  who  go,  and  by  the  Africans 
who  remain,  by  the  white  population  of  our  country,  by  Africa,  and 
by  America.  It  is  a  project  which  recommends  itself  to  favor  in  all  the 
aspects  in  which  it  can  be  contemplated.  It  will  do  good  in  every 
and  any  extent  in  which  it  may  be  executed.  It  is  a  circle  of  philan- 
thropy, every  segment  of  which  tells  and  testifies  to  the  beneficence  of 
the  whole. 

Every  emigrant  to  Africa  is  a  missionary  carrying  with  him  credentials 
in  the  holy  cause  of  civilization,  religion,  and  free  institutions.  Why  is  it 
that  the  degree  of  success  of  missionary  exertions  is  so  limited,  and  so  dis- 
couraging to  those  whose  piety  and  benevolence  prompt  them  ?  Is  it  not 
because  the  missionary  is  generally  an  alien  and  a  stranger,  perhaps  of  a 
different  color,  and  from  a  different  tribe  ?  There  is  a  sort  of  instinctive 
feeling  of  jealousy  and  distrust  toward  foreigners  which  repels  and  rejects 
them  in  all  countries  ;  and  this  feeling  is  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of 
ignorance  and  barbarism  which  prevail.  But  the  African  colonists,  whom 
we  send  to  convert  the  heathen,  are  of  the  same  color,  the  same  family, 


ON  AFRICAN   COLONIZATION.  339 

the  same  physical  constitution.  When  the  purposes  of  the  colony  shall  be 
fully  understood,  they  will  be  received  as  long-lost  brethren  restored  to  the 
embraces  of  their  friends  and  their  kindred  by  the  dispensations  of  a  wise 
Providence. 

The  Society  is  rej:>roached  for  agitating  this  question.  It  should  be  rec- 
ollected that  the  existence  of  free  people  of  color  is  not  limited  to  the 
States  only  which  tolerate  slavery.  The  evil  extends  itself  to  all  the 
States,  and  some  of  those  which  do  not  allow  of  slavery  (their  cities 
especially),  experience  the  evil  in  an  extent  even  greater  than  it  exists  in 
slave  States.  A  common  evil  confers  a  right  to  consider  and  apply  a  com- 
mon remedy.  Nor  is  it  a  valid  objection  that  this  remedy  is  partial  in  its 
operation  or  distant  in  its  efficacy.  A  patient,  writhing  under  the  tor- 
tures of  excruciating  disease,  asks  of  his  physician  to  cure  him  if  he  can, 
and,  if  he  can  not,  to  mitigate  his  sufferings.  But  the  remedy  proposed, 
if  generally  adopted  and  perseveringly  applied,  for  a  sufficient  length  of 
time,  should  it  not  entirely  eradicate  the  disease,  will  enable  the  body  poli- 
tic to  bear  it  without  danger  and  without  suffering:. 

We  are  reproached  with  doing  mischief  by  the  agitation  of  this  ques- 
tion.    The  Society  goes  into  no  household  to  disturb  its  domestic  tranquil- 
lity ;  it  addresses  itself  to  no  slaves  to  weaken  their  obligation  of  obedience. 
It  seeks  to  affect  no  man's  property.     It  neither  has  the  power  nor  the 
will  to  affect  the  property  of  any  one  contrary  to  his  consent.     The  execu- 
tion of  its  scheme  would  auo-ment  instead  of  diminishing  the  value  of  the 
property  left  behind.     The  Society,  composed  of  free  men,  concerns  itself 
only  with  the  free.     Collateral  consequences  we  are  not  respionsible  for. 
It  is  not  this  Society  which  has  produced  the  great  moral  revolution  which 
the  age  exhibits.     What  loould  they,  who  thus  reproach  us,  have  done  ?    If 
they  would  repress  all  tendencies  toward  liberty  and  ultimate  emancipation, 
they  must  do  more  than  put  doion  the  benevolent  efforts  of  this  Society. 
They  must  go  back  to  the  era  of  our  liberty  and  independence,  and  muzzle 
the  cannon  which  thunder  its  annual  joyous  return.     They  must  revive 
the  slave-trade,  with  all  its  train  of  atrocities.     They  must  suppress  the 
workings  of  British  philanthropy,  seeking  to  meliorate  the  condition  of 
the  unfortunate   West  Indian  slaves.      They  must  arrest  the  career  of 
South  American  deliverance  from  thralldom.     They  must  blow  out  the 
moral  lights  around  us,  and  extinguish   that  greatest  torch  of  all  which 
America  presents  to  a  benighted  world,  pointing  the  way  to  their  rights, 
their  liberties,  and  their  happiness.     And  when  they  have  achieved  all  these 
vurposes,  their  work  will  be  yet  incomplete.     They  must  penetrate  the 
human  soul,  and  eradicate   the  light  of  reason  and   the  love  of  liberty. 
Then,  and  not  till  then,  when  universal  darkness  and  despair  prevail,  can 
you  perpetuate  slavery,  and  repress  all  sympathies,  and  all  humane  and 
benevolent  efforts  among  freemen,  in  behalf  of  the  unhappy  portion  of  our 
race  doomed  to  bondage. 

Our  friends,  who  are  cursed  with  this  greatest  of  human  evils,  deserve 


340  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

the  kindest  attention  and  consideration.  Their  property  and  their  safety 
are  both  involved.  But  the  liberal  and  candid  among  them  will  not,  can 
not,  expect  that  every  project  to  deliver  our  country  from  it  is  to  be  crush- 
ed because  of  a  possible  and  ideal  danger.  Animated  by  the  encourage- 
ment of  the  past,  let  us  proceed  under  the  cheering  prospects  which  lie 
before  us.  Let  us  continue  to  appeal  to  the  pious,  the  liberal,  and  the  wise. 
Let  us  bear  in  mind  the  condition  of  our  forefathers,  when,  collected  on 
the  beach  in  England,  they  embarked,  amid  the  scoffings  and  the  false 
predictions  of  the  assembled  multitude,  for  this  distant  land  ;  and  here,  in 
spite  of  all  the  perils  of  forest  and  ocean,  which  they  encountered,  success- 
fully laid  the  foundation  of  this  glorious  republic.  Undismayed  by  the 
prophecies  of  the  presumptuous,  let  us  supplicate  the  aid  of  the  American 
representatives  of  the  people,  and  redoubling  our  labors,  and  invoking  the 
blessings  of  an  all-wise  Providence,  I  boldly  and  confidently  anticipate 
success.  I  hope  the  resolution  which  I  offer  will  be  unanimously 
adopted. 


BARGAIN    AND    CORRUPTION. 

LEXINGTON,  JULY  12,  1827. 

[The  following  is  one  of  the  most  spirited  speeches  which  Mr. 
Clay  ever  made,  and  he  was  justly  provoked  to  it.  If  any  one 
would  understand  the  wickedness  of  General  Jackson,  in  his 
attempts  to  injure  Mr.  Clay,  and  his  determination  to  make  his 
way  to  the  presidency  at  the  expense  of  truth  and  fairness,  he 
must  read  this  document ;  and  if  he  can  find  any  satisfaction 
in  seeing  such  iniquity  exposed  in  the  most  fervid  style  of 
eloquence,  and  by  the  closest  reasoning,  he  will  find  it  here.  In 
this  great  and  complicated  conspiracy,  there  was  always  the  most 
studied  avoidance  of  a  fair  hearing.  The  great  object  was  to 
keep  it  before  the  public  in  such  forms  as  to  injure  Mr.  Clay, 
and  help  General  Jackson  to  the  presidency.  When  the  charge 
was  first  brought  by  Kremer,  a  member  of  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives from  Pennsylvania,  Mr.  Clay  instantly  demanded  an 
investigation  by  a  special  committee  of  that  body.  But  inves- 
tigation and  the  truth  were  not  the  things  wanted,  and  it  was 
therefore  evaded  by  artifice.  Agitation,  by  false  statements  cir- 
culated among  the  people,  was  the  grand  device  ;  and  after 
keeping  these  false  statements  afloat  for  two  years,  General 
Jackson  comes  out,  over  his  own  name,  with  a  hypothetical 
charge,  indeed,  and  yet  such  as  would  seem  to  be  direct  and  ex- 
plicit, and  which  would  be  received  as  such.  It  was  left  to  Mr. 
Clay,  in  the  following  speech,  to  expose  its  atrocious  character. 
But  the  charge,  like  every  lie,  would  travel  over  the  Continent, 
while  Truth  was  putting  its  boots  on.  General  Jackson's  letter 
would  be  universally  read,  and  regarded  by  most  people  as 
plausible,  while  Mr.  Clay's  exposure  of  its  falsehood  would  have 
a  comparatively  limited  circulation.  The  exceedingly  wicked 
character  and  purpose  of  the  letter  can  only  be  appreciated  by  a 
perusal  of  the  following  discourse.  It  was  called  forth  by  a 
toast,  at  a  dinner  given  to  Mr.  Clay  at  Lexington,  as  follows  : 


342  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

"  Our  distinguished  guest,  Henry  Clay  :  the  furnace  of  persecution  may  be 
heated  seven  times  hotter,  and  seventy  times  more  he  will  come  out  unscathed 
by  the  fire  of  malignity,  brighter  to  all  and  dearer  to  his  friends;  while  his  ene- 
mies shall  sink  with  the  dross  of  their  own  vile  materials."] 

Mr.  President,  Friends,  and  Fellow-citizens — I  beg  permission  to 
offer  my  hearty  thanks,  and  to  make  my  respectful  acknowledgments,  for 
the  affectionate  reception  which  has  been  given  me  during  my  present  visit 
to  my  old  congressional  district,  and  for  this  hospitable  and  honorable  testi- 
mony of  your  esteem  and  confidence.     And  I  thank  you  especially  for  the 
friendly  sentiments  and  feelings  expressed  in  the  toast  which  you  have  just 
done  me  the  honor  to  drink.     I  always  had  the  happiness  of  knowing  that 
I  enjoyed,  in  a  high  degree,  the  attachment  of  that  portion  of  my  fellow- 
citizens  whom  I  formerly  represented  ;  but  I  should  never  have  been  sens- 
ible of  the  strength  and  ardor  of  their  affection,  except  for  the  extraordi- 
nary character  of  the  times.     For  nearly  two  years  and  a  half  I  have  been 
assailed  with  a  rancor  and  bitterness  which  have  few  examples.     I  have 
found  myself  the  particular  object  of  concerted  and  concentrated  abuse* 
and  others,  thrusting  themselves  between  you  and  me,  have  dared  to  ar- 
raign me  for  treachery  to  your  interests.     But  my  former  constituents,  un- 
affected by  the  calumnies  which  have  been  so  perseveiingly  circulated  to  my 
prejudice,  have  stood  by  me  with  a  generous  confidence  and  a  noble  mag- 
nanimity.    The  measure  of  their  regard  and  confidence  has  risen  with 
and  even  surpassed,  that  of  the  malevolence,  great  as  it  is,  of  my  personal 
and  political  foes.     I  thank  you,  gentlemen,  who  are  a  large  portion  of  my 
late  constituents.     I  thank  you,  and  every  one  of  them,  with  all  my  heart, 
for  the  manly  support  which   I  have  uniformly  received.     It  has  cheered, 
and  consoled  me,  amid  all  my  severe  trials ;  and  may  I  not  add,  that  it  is 
honorable  to  the  generous  hearts  and  enlightened  heads  who  have  resolved 
to  protect  the  character  of  an  old  friend  and  faithful  servant  ? 

The  numerous  manifestations  of  your  confidence  and  attachment  will 
be  among  the  latest  and  most  treasured  recollections  of  my  life.  They 
impose  upon  me  obligations  which  can  never  be  weakened  or  canceled. 
One  of  these  obligations  is,  that  I  should  embrace  every  fair  opportunity 
to  vindicate  that  character  which  you  have  so  generously  sustained,  and  to 
evince  to  you  and  to  the  world,  that  you  have  not  yielded  to  the  impulses 
of  a  blind  and  enthusiastic  sentiment.  I  feel  that  I  am,  on  all  fit  occasions, 
especially  bound  to  vindicate  myself  to  my  former  constituents.  It  was  as 
their  representative,  it  was  in  fulfillment  of  a  high  trust  which  they  con- 
fided to  me,  that  I  have  been  accused  of  violating  the  most  sacred  of  du- 
ties— of  treating  their  wishes  with  contempt,  and  their  interests  with 
treachery.  Nor  is  this  obligation,  in  my  conception  of  its  import,  at  all 
weakened  by  the  dissolution  of  the  relations  which  heretofore  existed  be- 
tween us.  I  would  instantly  resign  the  place  I  hold  in  the  councils  of  the 
nation,  and  directly  appeal  to  the  suffrages  of  my  late  constituents,  as  a 


BARGAIN  AND  CORRUPTION.  343 

candidate  for  re-election,  if  I  did  not  know  that  my  foes  are  of  that  class 
whom  one  rising  from  the  dead  can  not  convince,  whom  nothing  can 
silence,  and  who  wage  a  war  of  extermination.  On  the  issue  of  such  an 
appeal  they  would  redouble  their  abuse  of  you  and  of  me,  for  their  hatred 
is  common  to  us  both. 

They  have  compelled  me  so  often  to  be  the  theme  of  my  addresses  to 
the  people,  that  I  should  have  willingly  abstained,  on  this  festive  occasion, 
from  any  allusion  to  this  subject,  but  for  a  new  and  imposing  form  which 
the  calumny  against  me  has  recently  assumed.  I  am  again  put  on  my  de- 
fense, not  of  any  new  charge,  nor  by  any  new  adversary ;  but  of  the  old 
charges,  clad  in  a  new  dress,  and  exhibited  by  an  open  and  undisguised 
enemy.  The  fictitious  names  have  been  stricken  from  the  foot  of  the  in- 
dictment, and  that  of  a  known  and  substantial  prosecutor  has  been  volun- 
tarily offered.  Undaunted  by  the  formidable  name  of  that  prosecutor,  1 
will  avail  myself,  with  your  indulgence,  of  this  fit  opportunity  of  free  and 
unreserved  intercourse  with  you,  as  a  large  number  of  my  late  constituents, 
to  make  some  observations  on  the  past  and  preseut  state  of  the  question. 
When  evidence  shall  be  produced,  as  I  have  now  a  clear  right  to  demand, 
in  support  of  the  accusation,  it  will  be  the  proper  time  for  me  to  take  such 
notice  of  it  as  its  nature  shall  require. 

In  February,  1825,  it  was  my  duty,  as  the  representative  of  this  district, 
to  vote  for  some  one  of  the  three  candidates  for  the  presidency,  who  were 
returned  to  the  House  of  Representatives.  It  has  been  established,  and 
can  be  further  proved,  that,  before  I  left  this  State  the  preceding  fall,  I  com- 
municated to  several  gentlemen  of  the  highest  respectability  my  fixed  de- 
termination not  to  vote  for  General  Jackson.  The  friends  of  Mr.  Crawford 
asserted  to  the  last  that  the  condition  of  his  health  was  such  as  to  enable 
him  to  administer  the  duties  of  the  office.  I  thought  otherwise,  after  I 
reached  Washington  city,  and  visited  him  to  satisfy  myself;  and  thouo-ht 
that  physical  impediment,  if  there  were  no  other  objections,  ought  to  pre- 
vent his  election.  Although  the  delegations  from  four  States  voted  for 
him,  and  his  pretensions  were  zealously  pressed  to  the  veiy  last  moment,  it 
has  been  of  late  asserted,  and  I  believe  by  some  of  the  very  persons  who 
then  warmly  espoused  his  cause,  that  his  incompetency  was  so  palpable  as 
clearly  to  limit  the  choice  to  two  of  the  three  returned  candidates.  In  my 
view  of  my  duty,  there  was  no  alternative  but  that  which  I  embraced. 
That  I  had  some  objections  to  Mr.  Adams,  I  am  ready  freely  to  admit ;  but 
these  did  not  weigh  a  feather  in  comparison  with  the  greater  and  insur- 
mountable objections,  long  and  deliberately  entertained  against  his  com- 
petitor. I  take  this  occasion,  with  great  satisfaction,  to  state,  that  my 
objections  to  Mr.  Adams  arose  chiefly  from  apprehensions  which  have  not 
been  realized.  I  have  found  him  at  the  head  of  the  government  able,  en- 
lightened, patient  of  investigation,  and  ever  ready  to  receive  with  respect, 
and,  when  approved  by  his  judgment,  to  act  upon,  the  counsels  of  his  official 
advisers.     I  add,  with  unmixed  pleasure,  that,  from  the  commencement  of 


344  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

the  government,  with  the  exception  of  Mr.  Jefferson's  administration,  no 
chief  magistrate  has  fouud  the  members  of  his  cabinet  so  united  on  all 
public  measures,  and  so  cordial  and  friendly  in  all  their  intercourse,  private 
and  official,  as  these  are  of  the  present  president. 

Had  I  voted  for  General  Jackson,  in  opposition  to  the  well-knowu  opin- 
ions which  I  entertained  of  him,  one  tenth  part  of  the  ingenuity  and  zeal 
which  have  been  employed  to  excite  prejudices  against  me,  would  have 
held  me  up  to  universal  contempt ;  and  what  would  have  been  worse,  I 
should  have  felt  that  I  really  deserved  it. 

Before  the  election,  an  attempt  was  made  by  an  abusive  letter,  published 
in  the  Columbian  Observer,  at  Philadelphia,  a  paper  which,  as  has  since 
transpired,  was  sustained  by  Mr.  Senator  Eaton,  the  colleague,  the  friend, 
and  the  biographer  of  General  Jackson,  to  assail  my  motives,  and  to  deter 
me  in  the  exercise  of  my  duty.  This  letter  being  avowed  by  Mr.  George 
Kremer,  I  instantly  demanded  from  the  House  of  Representatives  an  invest- 
igation. A  committee  was  accordingly,  on  the  5th  day  of  February,  1825, 
appointed  in  the  rare  mode  of  balloting  by  the  House,  instead  of  by  se- 
lection of  the  Speaker.  It  was  composed  of  some  of  the  leading  members 
of  that  body,  not  one  of  whom  was  my  political  friend  in  the  preceding 
presidential  canvass.  Although  Mr.  Kremer,  in  addressing  the  House,  had 
declared  his  willingness  to  bring  forward  his  proofs,  and  his  readiness  to 
abide  the  issue  of  the  inquiry,  his  fears,  or  other  counsels  than  his  own, 
prevailed  upon  him  to  take  refuge  in  a  miserable  subterfuge.  Of  all  possi- 
ble periods,  that  was  the  most  fitting  to  substantiate  the  charge,  if  it  were 
true.  Every  circumstance  was  then  fresh ;  the  witnesses  all  living  and 
present ;  the  election  not  yet  complete ;  and  therefore  the  imputed  corrupt 
bargain  not  fulfilled.  All  these  powerful  considerations  had  no  weight 
with  the  conspirators  and  their  accessories,  and  they  meanly  shrunk  from 
even  an  attempt  to  prove  their  charge,  for  the  best  of  all  possible  reasons — 
because,  being  false  and  fabricated,  they  could  adduce  no  proof  which  was 
not  false  and  fabricated. 

During  two  years  and  a  half,  which  have  now  intervened,  a  portion  of 
the  press  devoted  to  the  cause  of  General  Jackson  has  been  teeming  with 
the  vilest  calumnies  against  me,  and  the  charge,  under  every  chameleon 
form,  has  been  a  thousand  times  repeated.  Up  to  this  time  I  have  in  vain 
invited  investigation,  and  demanded  evidence.  None,  not  a  particle,  has 
been  adduced. 

The  extraordinary  ground  has  been  taken,  that  the  accusers  were  not 
bound  to  establish  by  proof  the  guilt  of  their  designated  victim.  In  a 
civilized,  Christian,  and  free  community,  the  monstrous  principle  has  been 
assumed,  that  accusation  and  conviction  are  synonymous;  and  that  the 
persons  who  deliberately  bring  forward  an  atrocious  charge  are  exempted 
from  all  obligations  to  substantiate  it!  And  the  pretext  is,  that  the  crime, 
being  of  a  political  nature,  is  shrouded  in  darkness,  and  incapable  of  being 
substantiated.     But  is  there  any  real  difference,  in  this  respect,  between 


BARGAIN    AND    CORRUPTION.  345 

political  and  other  offenses  ?  Do  not  all  the  perpetrators  of  crime  en- 
deavor to  conceal  their  guilt  and  to  elude  detection  ?  If  the  accuser  of  a 
political  offense  is  absolved  from  the  duty  of  supporting  Ids  accusation, 
every  other  accuser  of  offense  stands  equally  absolved.  Such  a  principle, 
practically  carried  into  society,  would  subvert  all  harmony,  peace,  and 
tranquillity.  None — no  age,  nor  sex,  nor  profession,  nor  calling — would 
be  safe  against  its  baleful  and  overwhelming  influence.  It  would  amount 
to  a  universal  license  to  universal  calumny. 

No  one  has  ever  contended  that  the  proof  should  be  exclusively  that  of 
eye-witnesses,  testifying  from  their  senses  positively  and  directly  to  the 
fact.  Political,  like  other  offenses,  may  be  established  by  circumstantial 
as  well  as  positive  evidence.  But  I  do  contend,  that  some  evidence,  be  it 
what  it  may,  ought  to  be  exhibited.  If  there  be  none,  how  do  the  accus- 
ers know  that  an  offense  has  been  perpetrated  ?  If  they  do  know  it,  let 
us  liave  the  fact  on  which  their  conviction  is  based.  I  will  not  even  assert, 
that,  in  public  affairs,  a  citizen  has  not  a  right  freely  to  express  bis  opinions 
of  public  men,  and  to  speculate  upon  the  motives  of  their  conduct.  But 
if  he  chooses  to  promulgate  opinions,  let  them  be  given  as  opinions.  The 
public  will  correctly  judge  of  their  value  and  their  grounds.  No  one  has 
a  right  to  put  forth  a  positive  assertion,  that  a  political  offense  has  been 
committed,  unless  he  stands  prepared  to  sustaiu,  by  satisfactory  pi'oof  of 
some  kind,  its  actual  existence. 

If  he  who  exhibits  a  charge  of  political  crime  is,  from  its  very  nature, 
disabled  to  establish  it,  how  much  more  difficult  is  the  condition  of  the 
accused  ?  How  can  he  exhibit  negative  proof  of  his  innocence,  if  no  af- 
firmative proof  of  his  guilt  is  or  can  be  adduced  ? 

It  must  have  been  a  conviction  that  the  justice  of  the  public  required 
a  definite  charge,  by  a  responsible  accuser,  that  has  at  last  extorted  from 
General  Jackson  his  letter  of  the  6th  of  June,  lately  published.  I  approach 
that  letter  with  great  reluctance,  not  on  my  own  account,  for  on  that  I  do 
most  heartily  and  sincerely  rejoice  that  it  has  made  its  appearance.  But 
it  is  reluctance,  excited  by  the  feelings  of  respect  which  I  would  anxiously 
have  cultivated  toward  its  author.  He  has,  however,  by  that  letter,  created 
such  relations  between  us,  that,  in  any  language  which  I  may  employ,  in 
examining  its  contents,  I  feel  myself  bound  by  no  other  obligations  than 
those  which  belong  to  truth,  to  public  decorum,  and  to  myself. 

The  first  consideration  which  must,  on  the  perusal  of  the  letter,  force 
itself  upon  every  reflecting  mind,  is  that  which  arises  out  of  the  delicate 
posture  in  which  General  Jackson  stands  before  the  American  public.  He 
is  a  candidate  for  the  presidency,  avowed  and  proclaimed.  He  has  no 
competitor  at  present,  and  there  is  no  probability  of  his  having  any  but 
one.  The  charges  which  he  has  allowed  himself  to  be  the  organ  of  com- 
municating to  the  very  public  who  is  to  decide  the  question  of  the  pres- 
idency, though  directly  aimed  at  me,  necessarily  implicate  his  only  com- 
petitor.    Mr.  Adams  and  myself  are  both  guilty,  or  we  are  both  innocent, 


346  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

of  the  imputed  arrangement  between  us.  His  innocence  is  absolutely  ir- 
reconcilable with  my  guilt.  If  General  Jackson,  therefore,  can  establish 
my  guilt,  and,  by  inference,  or  by  insinuation,  that  of  his  sole  rival,  be  will 
have  removed  a  great  obstacle  to  the  consummation  of  tbe  object  of  bis 
ambition.  And  if  he  can,  at  tbe  same  time,  make  out  his  own  purity  of 
conduct,  and  impress  tbe  American  people  with  the  belief,  that  his  purity 
and  integrity  alone  prevented  his  success  before  the  House  of  Representa- 
tives, his  claims  will  become  absolutely  irresistible.  Were  there  ever 
more  powerful  motives  to  propagate,  was  there  ever  greater  interest,  at  all 
hazards,  to  prove  the  truth  of  charges  ? 

I  state  the  case,  I  hope,  fairly  ;  I  mean  to  state  it  fairly  and  fearlessly.  If 
the  position  be  one  which  exposes  General  Jackson  to  unfavorable  suspicious, 
it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  he  has  voluntarily  taken  it,  and  he  must 
abide  the  consequences.  I  am  acting  on  the  defensive,  and  it  is  he  who 
assails  me,  and  who  has  called  forth,  by  the  eternal  laws  of  self-protection, 
the  right  to  use  all  legitimate  means  of  self-defense. 

General  Jackson  has  shown  in  his  letter,  that  he  is  not  exempt  from  the 
influence  of  that  bias  toward  one's  own  interest,  which  is  unfortunately  the 
too  common  lot  of  human  nature.  It  is  his  interest  to  make  out  that  he 
is  a  person  of  spotless  innocence,  and  of  unsullied  integrity;  and  to  estab- 
lish, by  direct  charge,  or  by  necessary  inference,  the  want  of  those  quali- 
ties in  his  rival.  Accordingly,  we  find,  throughout  the  letter,  a  labored 
attempt  to  set  forth  his  own  immaculate  purity  in  striking  contrast  with 
the  corruption  which  is  attributed  to  others.  We  would  imagine  from  his 
letter,  that  ho  very  seldom  touches  a  newspaper.  The  Telegraph  is  mailed 
regularly  for  him  at  Washington,  but  it  arrives  at  the  Hermitage  very  ir- 
regularly. He  would  have  the  public  to  infer,  that  the  postmaster  at  Nash- 
ville, whose  appointment  happened  not  to  be  upon  bis  recommendation, 
obstructed  his  reception  of  it.  In  consequence  of  his  not  receiving  the 
Telegraph,  he  had  not  on  the  6th  of  June,  1827,  seen  Carter  Beverley's 
famous  Fayetteville  letter,  dated  the  8th  of  the  preceding  March,  pub- 
lished in  numerous  gazettes,  and  published,  I  have  very  little  doubt,  although 
I  have  not  the  means  of  ascertaining  the  fact,  in  the  Gazettes  of  Nashville. 
I  will  not  say,  contrary  to  General  Jackson's  assertion,  that  be  had  never 
read  that  letter,  when  he  wrote  that  of  the  6th  of  June,  but  I  must  think 
that  it  is  very  strange  that  he  should  not  have  seen  it ;  and  I  doubt  wheth- 
er there  is  another  man  of  any  political  eminence  in  the  United  States  who 
has  not  read  it.  There  is  a  remarkable  coincidence  between  General  Jack- 
son and  certain  editors  who  espouse  bis  interest,  in  relation  to  Mr.  Bever- 
ley's letter.  They  very  early  took  the  grouud,  in  respect  to  it,  that  I  ought, 
under  my  own  signature,  to  come  out  and  deny  the  statements.  And  Gen- 
eral Jackson  now  says,  in  his  letter  of  the  6th  of  June,  that  be  "always 
intended,  should  Mi1.  Clay  come  out  over  his  own  signature,  and  deny  hav- 
ing any  knowledge  of  the  communication  made  by  his  friends  to  my  friends 


BARGAIN  AND  CORRUPTION.  347 

and  to  me,  that  I  would  give  hirn  the  name  of  the  gentleman  through 
whom  that  communication  came." 

The  distinguished  member  of  Congress  who  bore  the  alleged  overture, 
according  to  General  Jackson,  presented  himself  with  diplomatic  circum- 
spection, lest  he  should  wound  the  very  great  sensibility  of  the  general. 
He  avers  that  the  communication  was  intended  with  the  most  friendly  mo- 
tives ;  "  that  he  came  as  a  friend,"  and  that  he  hoped,  however  it  might  be 
received,  there  would  be  no  alteration  in  the  friendly  feelings  between  them. 
The  general  graciously  condescends  to  receive  the  communication,  and,  in 
consideration  of  the  high  standing  of  the  distinguished  member,  and  of 
his  having  always  been  a  professed  friend,  he  is  promised  impunity,  and 
assured  that  there  shall  be  no  change  of  amicable  ties.  After  all  these 
necessary  preliminaries  are  arranged  between  the  high  negotiating  powers, 
the  envoy  proceeds :  "  He  had  been  informed  by  the  friends  of  Mr.  Clay, 
that  the  friends  of  Mr.  Adams  had  made  overtures  to  them,  saying  if  Mr. 
Clay  and  his  friends  wrould  unite  in  aid  of  the  election  of  Mr.  Adams,  Mr. 
Clay  should  be  Secretary  of  State  ;  that  the  friends  of  Mr.  Adams  were 
urging,  as  a  reason  to  induce  the  friends  of  Mr.  Clay  to  accede  to  their 
proposition,  that  if  I  was  elected  president,  Mr.  Adams  would  be  continued 
Secretary  of  State,  (innuendo,  there  would  be  no  room  for  Kentucky)."  [Is 
this  General  Jackson's  innuendo,  or  that  of  the  distinguished  member  of 
Congress  ?]  "  That  the  friends  of  Mr.  Clay  stated  the  West  does  not  want 
to  separate  from  the  West  and  if  I  would  say,  or  permit  any  of  my  confi- 
dential friends  to  say  that,  in  case  I  was  elected  president,  Mr.  Adams 
should  not  be  continued  Secretary  of  State,  by  a  complete  union  of  Mr. 
Clay  and  his  friends,  they  would  put  an  end  to  the  presidential  contest  in 
one  hour ;  and  he  was  of  opinion  it  was  right  to  fight  such  intriguers  with 
their  own  weapons."  To  which  the  general  states  himself  to  have  replied 
in  substance,  "  that  in  politics,  as  in  every  thing  else,  my  guide  was  prin- 
ciple, and  contrary  to  the  expressed  and  unbiased  will  of  the  people  or  their 
constituted  agents,  I  never  would  step  into  the  presidential  chair ;  and  re- 
quested him  to  say  to  Mr.  Clay  and  his  friends  (for  I  did  suppose  he  had 
come  from  Mr.  Clay,  although  he  used  the  terms  Mr.  Clay's  friends),  that 
before  I  would  reach  the  presidential  chair  by  such  means  of  bargain  and 
corruption,  I  would  see  the  earth  open  and  swallow  both  Mr.  Clay  and  his 
friends  and  myself  with  them."  Now  all  these  professions  are  very  fine, 
and  display  admirable  purity.  But  its  sublimity  would  be  somewhat  more 
impressive,  if  some  person  other  than  General  Jackson  had  proclaimed  it. 
He  would  go  into  the  presidential  chair,  but  never,  no  !  never,  contrary  to 
"  the  expressed  and  unbiased  will  of  the  people,  or  their  constituted  agents  :" 
two  modes  of  arriving  at  it  the  more  reasonable,  as  there  happens  to  be 
no  other  constituted  way.  He  would  see  "  the  earth  open  and  swallow 
both  Mr.  Clay  and  his  friends  aud  myself,"  before  he  would  reach  the  pres- 
idential chair  by  "such  means  of  bargain  and  corruption."  I  hope  Gen- 
eral Jackson  did  not  intend  that   the  whole   human  race  should  be  also 


348  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

swallowed  up,  on  the  contingency  be  has  stated,  or  that  they  were  to 
guaranty  that  he  has  an  absolute  repugnance  to  the  employment  of  any  ex- 
ceptionable means  to  secure  his  elevation  to  the  presidency.  If  he  had 
rendered  the  distinguished  member  of  Congress  a  little  more  distinguished, 
by  instantly  ordering  him  from  his  presence,  and  by  forthwith  denouncing 
him  and  the  infamous  propositions  which  he  bore  to  the  American  public, 
we  should  be  a  little  better  prepared  to  admit  the  claims  to  untarnished 
integrity,  which  the  general  so  modestly  puts  forward.  But,  according  to 
his  own  account,  a  corrupt  and  scandalous  proposal  is  made  to  him  ;  the 
person  who  conveyed  it,  advises  him  to  accept  it,  and  yet  that  person  still 
retains  the  friendship  of  General  Jackson,  who  is  so  tender  of  his  character 
that  his  name  is  carefully  concealed  and  reserved  to  be  hereafter  brought 
forward  as  a  witness !  A  man,  who,  if  he  be  a  member  of  the  House  of 
Representatives,  is  doubly  infamous — infamous  for  the  advice  which  he 
gave,  and  infamous  for  his  willingness  to  connive  at  the  corruption  of  the 
body  of  which  he  is  a  sworn  member — is  the  credible  witness  by  whom 
General  Jackson  stands  ready  to  establish  the  corruption  of  men  whose 
characters  are  never  questioned. 

Of  all  the  properties  which  belong  to  honorable  men,  not  one  is  so 
highly  prized  as  that  of  character.  General  Jackson  can  not  be  insens- 
ible to  its  value,  for  he  appears  to  be  the  most  anxious  to  set  forth  the 
loftiness  and  purity  of  his  own.  How  has  he  treated  mine  ?  During  the 
dispensation  of  the  hospitalities  of  the  Hermitage,  in  the  midst  of  a  mixed 
company  of  individuals  from  various  States,  he  permits  himself  to  make 
certain  statements  respecting  my  friends  and  me,  which,  if  true,  would  for- 
ever dishonor  and  degrade  us.  The  words  are  hardly  passed  from  his 
mouth,  before  they  are  committed  to  paper  by  one  of  his  guests,  and  trans- 
mitted in  the  form  of  a  letter  to  another  State,  when  they  are  published  in 
a  newspaper,  and  thence  circulated  throughout  the  Union.  And  now  he 
pretends  that  these  statements  were  made  "  without  any  calculation  that 
they  were  to  be  thrown  into  the  public  journals."  Does  he  reprove  the 
indiscretion  of  his  guest  who  had  violated  the  sanctity  of  a  conversation  at 
the  hospitable  board  ?  Far  from  it.  The  public  is  incredulous.  It  can  not 
be,  General  Jackson  would  be  so  wanting  in  delicacy  and  decorum.  The 
guest  appeals  to  him  for  the  confirmation  of  the  published  statements  ;  and 
the  General  promptly  addresses  a  letter  to  him,  in  which  "  he  unequivocally 
confirms  (says  Mr.  Carter  Beverely),  all  I  have  said  regarding  the  overture 
made  to  him  pending  the  last  presidential  election  before  Congress  ;  and  he 
asserts  a  great  deal  more  than  lie  ever  told  me."  I  should  be  glad  to  know 
it'  all  the  versions  of  the  tale  have  now  made  their  appearance,  and  whether 
General  Jackson  will  allege,  that  he  did  not  "  calculate  "  upon  the  publica- 
tion of  his  letter  of  the  6th  of  June. 

The  general  states  that  the  unknown  envoy  used  the  terms,  <%  Mr  Clay's 
friends,"  to  the  exclusion,  therefore,  of  myself,  but  he  nevertheless  inferred 
that  he  had  come  from  me.     Now,  why  did  he  draw  this  inference  contra- 


BARGAIN    AND    CORRUPTION.  349 

ry  to  the  import  of  the  statement  which  he  received  ?  Does  not  this  dis- 
position to  deduce  conclusions  unfavorable  to  me,  manifest  the  spirit  which 
actuates  him  ?  And  does  not  General  Jackson  exhibit  throughout  his  let- 
ter a  desire  to  give  a  coloring  to  the  statements  of  his  friend,  the  distin- 
guished member  of  Congress,  higher  than  they  would  justify  ?  No  one 
should  ever  resort  to  implication  but  from  necessity.  Why  did  he  not 
ascertain  from  the  envoy  if  he  had  come  from  me  ?  Was  any  thing  more 
natiral  than  that  General  Jackson  should  ascertain  the  persons  who  had 
deputed  the  envoy  ?  If  his  slacked  sensibility  and  indignant  virtue  and 
patriotism  would  not  allow  him  to  inquire  into  particulars,  ought  he  to 
have  hazarded  the  assertion,  that  I  was  privy  to  the  proposal,  without  as- 
suring himself  of  the  fact ;  could  he  not,  after  rejecting  the  proposal,  con- 
tinuing, as  he  did,  on  friendly  terms  with  the  organ  of  it,  have  satisfied 
himself  if  I  were  conusant  of  it  ?  If  he  had  not  time  then,  might  he  not 
have  ascertained  the  fact  from  his  friend  or  from  me,  during  the  interven- 
ing two  and  a  half  years  ?  The  compunctions  of  his  own  conscience  appear 
for  a  moment  to  have  visited  him  toward  the  conclusion  of  his  letter,  for 
he  there  does  say,  "that  in  the  supposition  stated,  I  may  have  done  injust- 
ice to  Mr.  Clay ;  if  so,  the  gentleman  informing  me  can  explain."  No 
good  or  honorable  man  will  do  another  voluntarily  any  injustice.  It  was 
not  necessarv  that  General  Jackson  should  have  done  me  any.  And  he 
can  not  acquit  himself  of  the  rashness  and  iniquity  of  his  conduct  toward 
me,  by  referring  at  this  late  day  to  a  person  whose  name  is  withheld  from 
the  public.  This  compendious  mode  of  administering  justice,  by  first  hang- 
ing and  then  trying  a  man,  however  justifiable  it  may  be,  according  to  the 
precepts  of  the  Jackson  code,  is  sanctioned  by  no  respectable  system  of 
jurisprudence. 

It  is  stated  in  the  letter  of  the  6th  of  June,  that  the  overture  was  made 
early  in  January ;  and  that  the  second  day  after  the  communication,  it 
"  was  announced  in  the  newspapers,  that  Mr.  Clay  had  come  out  openly 
and  avowedly  in  favor  of  Mr.  Adams."  The  object  of  this  statement  is  ob- 
vious. It  is  to  insinuate  that  the  proposal  which  was  rejected  with  disdain 
by  General  Jackson,  was  accepted  with  promptitude  by  Mr.  Adams.  This 
renders  the  fact  as  to  the  time  of  the  alleged  annunciation  very  important. 
It  is  to  be  regretted  that  General  Jackson  had  not  been  a  little  more  pre- 
cise. It  was  early  in  January  that  the  overture  was  made,  and  the  second 
day  after,  the  annunciation  of  my  inteution  took  place.  Now,  I  will  not 
assert  that  there  may  not  have  been  some  speculations  in  the  newspapers 
about  that  time  (although  I  do  not  believe  there  were  any  speculations  so 
early),  as  to  the  probable  vote  I  should  give  ;  but  I  should  be  glad  to  see 
any  newspaper  which  the  second  day  after  early  in  January,  asserted  in  its 
columns,  that  I  had  come  out  "openly  and  avowedly  in  favor  of  Mr. 
Adams."  I  challenge  the  production  of  such  a  paper.  I  do  not  believe 
my  iutention  so  to  vote  for  Mr.  Adams  was  announced  in  the  newspapers 
openly  and  avowedly  during  the  whole  month  of  January,  or  at  any  rate 


350  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

until  late  in  that  month.  The  only  avowal  of  my  intention  to  vote  for 
him,  which  was  publicly  made  in  the  newspapers,  prior  to  the  election,  is 
contained  in  my  letter  to  Judge  Brooke,  which  is  dated  the  28th  of  Janu- 
ary. It  was  first  published  in  the  Enquirer  at  Richmond,  some  time  in 
the  ensuing-  month.  I  go  further :  I  do  not  believe  any  newspaper  at 
Washington  can  be  produced,  announcing,  before  the  latter  part  of  January, 
the  fact,  whether  upon  my  avowal  or  not,  of  my  intention  to  vote  for  Mr. 
Adams.  General  Jackson's  memory  must  deceive  him.  He  must  have 
confounded  events  and  circumstances.  His  friend,  Mr.  George  Kreiner,  in 
his  letter  to  the  Columbian  Observer  bearing  date  the  25th  of  January, 
has,  according  to  my  recollection  of  the  public  prints,  a  claim  to  the  merit 
of  being  the  first,  or  among  the  first,  to  announce  to  the  public  my  intend- 
ed vote.  That  letter  was  first  published  at  Philadelphia,  and  returned  in 
the  Columbian  Observer  to  Washington  city,  on  the  31st  of  January. 
How  long  before  its  date  that  letter  was  written  to  Mr.  Kremer,  does  not 
appear.  Whether  there  be  any  connection  made  by  the  distinguished 
member  of  Congress,  and  that  letter,  perhaps  General  Jackson  can  ex- 
plain. 

At  the  end  of  more  than  two  years,  after  a  corrupt  overture  has  been 
made  to  General  Jackson,  he  now,  for  the  first  time,  openly  proclaims  it. 
It  is  true,  as  I  have  ascertained  since  the  publication  of  Mr.  Beverley's 
Fayetteville  letter,  the  general  has  been  for  a  long  time  secretly  circulating 
the  charge.  Immediately  on  the  appearance  at  Washington  of  that  letter 
in  the  public  prints,  the  editor  of  the  Telegraph  asserted,  in  his  paper,  that 
General  Jackson  had  communicated  the  overture  to  him  about  the  period 
of  the  election,  not  as  he  now  states,  but  according  to  Mr.  Beverley's  ver- 
sion of  the  tale.  Since  I  left  Washington  on  the  10th  of  last  month,  I 
have  understood  that  General  Jackson  has  made  a  similar  communication 
to  several  other  persons  at  different  and  distant  points.  Why  has  the 
overture  been  thus  clandestinely  circulated  ?  Was  it  that  through  the 
medium  of  the  Telegraph,  the  leading  paper  supporting  the  interest  of 
Geueral  Jackson,  and  through  his  other  depositories,  the  belief  of  the 
charge  should  be  duly  and  gradually  infused  into  the  public  mind,  and 
thus  contribute  to  the  support  of  his  cause  ?  The  zeal  and  industry  with 
which  it  has  been  propagated,  the  daily  colunms  of  certain  newspapers  can 
testify.  Finding  the  public  still  unconvinced,  has  the  general  found  it  to 
be  necessary  to  come  out  in  proper  person,  through  the  thin  vail  of  Mr. 
Carter  Beverley's  agency  ? 

When  the  alleged  overture  was  made,  the  election  remained  undecided. 
Why  did  not  General  Jackson  then  hold  up  to  universal  scorn  and  indig- 
nation the  infamous  bearer  of  the  proposal,  and  those  who  dared  to  insult 
his  honor,  and  tamper  with  his  integrity  ?  If  he  had  at  that  time  de- 
nounced all  the  infamous  parties  concerned,  demanded  an  inquiry  in  the 
House  of  Representatives,  and  established  by  satisfactory  proof  the  truth 
of  his  accusation,  there  might  and  probably  would  have  been  a  different 


BARGAIN    AND    CORRUPTION.  351 

result  to  the  election.  Why,  Avhen  at  my  instance,  a  committee  was  on 
the  5th  day  of  February,  1825  (only  four  days  before  the  election),  ap- 
pointed to  investigate  the  charges  of  Mr.  Kremer,  did  not  General  Jackson 
present  hiinself  and  establish  their  truth?  Why,  on  the  7th  of  that 
month,  two  days  before  the  election,  when  the  committee  reported  that 
Mr.  Kremer  declined  to  come  forward,  and  that  "  if  they  knew  of  any 
reason  for  such  investigation,  they  would  have  asked  to  be  clothed  with 
the  proper  power,  but  not  having  themselves  any  such  knowledge,  they 
have  felt  it  to  be  their  duty  only  to  lay  before  the  House  the  communica- 
tion which  they  have  received ;"  why  did  not  General  Jackson  authorize  a 
motion  to  recommit  the  report,  and  manfully  come  forward  with  all  his 
information  ?  The  Congress  of  the  nation  is  in  session.  An  important  elec- 
tion has  devolved  on  it.  All  eyes  are  turned  toward  Washington.  The 
result  is  awaited  with  intense  anxiety  and  breathless  expectation.  A  corrupt 
proposition  affecting  the  election  is  made  to  one  of  the  candidates.  He  re- 
ceives it,  Ts  advised  to  accept  it,  deliberates,  decides  upon  it.  A  committee 
is  in  session  to  investigate  the  very  charge.  The  candidate,  notwithstand- 
ing, remains  profoundly  silent,  and,  after  the  lapse  of  more  than  two  years, 
when  the  period  of  another  election  is  rapidly  approaching,  in  which  he  is 
the  only  competitor  for  the  office,  for  the  first  time,  announces  it  to  the 
American  republic  !  They  must  have  more  than  an  ordinary  share  of 
creulity  who  do  not  believe  that  General  Jackson  labors  under  some  ex- 
traordinary delusion. 

It  is  possible  that  he  may  urge  by  way  of  excuse,  for  what  must  be 
deemed  his  culpable  concealment  of  meditated  corruption,  that  he  did  not 
like  to  volunteer  as  a  witness  before  the  committee,  or  to  transmit  to  it  the 
name  of  his  friend,  the  distinguished  member  of  the  House  of  Representa- 
tives, although  it  is  not  very  easy  to  discern  any  just  reason  for  his  volun- 
teering now,  which  would  not  have  applied  with  more  force  at  that  time. 
But  what  apology  can  be  made  for  his  failure  to  discharge  his  sacred  duty 
as  an  American  senator  ?  More  than  two  months  after  the  alleged  overture, 
my  nomination  to  the  office  which  I  now  hold,  was  made  to  the  Senate 
of  the  United  States,  of  which  General  Jackson  was  then  a  sworn  member. 
On  that  nomination  he  had  to  deliberate  and  to  act  in  the  most  solemn 
manner.  If  I  were  privy  to  a  corrupt  proposal  to  General  Jackson,  touch- 
ing the  recent  election  ;  if  I  had  entered  into  a  corrupt  bargain  with  Mr. 
Adams  to  secure  his  elevation,  I  was  unworthy  of  the  office  to  which  I  was 
nominated  ;  and  it  was  the  duty  of  General  Jackson,  if  he  really  possessed 
the  information  which  he  now  puts  forward,  to  have  moved  the  Senate  to 
appoint  a  committee  of  inquiry,  and  by  establishing  my  guilt,  to  have 
preserved  the  national  councils  from  an  abominable  contamination.  As 
the  conspiracy  of  George  Kremer  <fe  Co.  had  a  short  time  before  meanly 
shrunk  from  appearing  before  the  committee  of  the  House  of  Representa- 
tives, to  make  good  their  charges,  I  requested  a  senator  of  the  United 
States,  when  my  nomination  should  be  taken  up,  to  ask  of  the  Senate  the 


352  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

appointment  of  a  committee  of  inquiry,  unless  it  should  appear  to  him  to  be 
altogether  unnecessary.  One  of  our  senators  was  compelled,  by  the  urg- 
ency of  his  private  business,  to  leave  Washington  before  my  nomination 
was  disposed  of;  and  as  I  had  but  little  confidence  in  the  fidelity  and  pro- 
fessed friendship  of  the  other,  I  was  constrained  to  present  my  application 
to  a  senator  from  another  State.  I  was  afterward  informed  that  when  it 
was  acted  upon,  General  Jackson,  and  every  other  senator  present,  was 
silent  as  to  the  imputation  now  made ;  no  one  presuming  to  question  my 
honor  or  integrity.  How  can  General  Jackson  justify  to  his  conscience 
or  to  his  country  this  palpable  breach  of  his  public  duty  ?  It  is  in  vain  to 
say  that  he  gave  a  silent  negative  vote.  He  was  in  possession  of  informa- 
tion which,  if  true,  must  have  occasioned  the  rejection  of  my  nomination. 
It  does  not  appear  that  any  other  senator  possessed  the  same  information. 
Investigation  was  alike  due  to  the  purity  of  the  national  councils,  to  me, 
and,  as  an  act  of  strict  justice,  to  all  the  other  parties  implicated.  It  is 
impossible  for  him  to  escape  from  the  dilemma  that  he  has  been  faithless 
as  a  senator  of  the  United  States,  or  has  lent  himself  to  the  circulation  of 
an  atrocious  calumny. 

After  the  election,  General  Jackson  was  among  the  first  who  eagerly 
pressed  his  congratulations  upon  his  successful  rival.  If  Mr.  Adams  had 
been  guilty  of  the  employment  of  impure  means  to  effect  his  election, 
General  Jackson  ought  to  have  disdained  to  sully  his  own  hands  by  touch- 
ing those  of  his  corrupt  competitor. 

On  the  10th  of  February,  1825,  the  very  next  day  after  the  election, 
General  Jackson  was  invited  to  a  public  dinner  at  Washington,  by  some 
of  his  friends.  He  expressed  to  them  his  wish  that  he  might  be  excused 
from  accepting  the  invitation,  because,  alluding  to  the  recent  election,  he 
said,  "  any  evidence  of  kindness  and  regard,  such  as  you  propose,  might, 
by  many,  be  viewed  as  conveying  with  it  exception,  murmuring,  and  feel- 
ings of  complaint,  which  I  sincerely  hope  belong  to  none  of  my  friends." 
More  than  one  month  after  the  corrupt  proposal  is  pretended  to  have  been 
received,  and  after,  according  to  the  insinuation  of  General  Jackson,  a  cor- 
rupt arrangement  had  been  made  between  Mr.  Adams  and  me  ;  after  the 
actual  termination  of  an  election,  the  issue  of  which  was  brought  about, 
according  to  General  Jackson,  by  the  basest  means,  he  was  unwilling  to 
accept  the  honors  of  a  public  dinner,  lest  it  should  imply  even  an  exception 
against  the  result  of  the  election. 

General  Jackson  professes  in  his  letter  of  the  6th  of  June — I  quote 
again  his  words — "  to  have  always  intended,  should  Mr.  Clay  come  out 
over  his  own  signature,  and  deny  having  had  any  knowledge  of  the  com- 
munication made  by  his  friends  to  my  friends,  and  to  me,  that  I  would 
give  him  the  name  of  the  gentleman  through  whom  that  communication 
came."  He  pretends  never  to  have  seen  the  Fayetteville  letter ;  and  yet 
the  pretext  of  a  denial  under  my  signature  is  precisely  that  which  had 
been  urged  by  the  principal  editors  who  sustain  his  cause.     If  this  be  an 


BARGAIN   AND   CORRUPTION.  353 

unconcerted,  it  is  nevertheless  a  most  wonderful  coincidence.  The  general 
never  communicated  to  me  his  professed  intention,  but  left  me  in  entire 
ignorance  of  his  generous  purpose ;  like  the  overture  itself,  it  was  pro- 
foundly concealed  from  me.  There  was  an  authorized  denial  from  me, 
which  went  to  the  circle  of  the  public  prints,  immediately  after  the  arrival 
at  Washington  of  the  Fayetteville  letter.  In  that  denial  my  words  are 
given.  They  were  contained  in  a  letter  dated  at  Washington  city  on  the 
18th  day  of  April  last,  and  are  correctly  stated  to  have  been  "that  the 
statemeut  that  his  (my)  friends  had  made  such  a  proposition  as  the  latter 
describes  to  tlie  friends  of  General  Jackson  was,  as  far  as  he  knew  or  be- 
lieved, utterly  destitute  of  foundation ;  that  he  was  unwilling  to  believe 
that  General  Jackson  had  made  any  such  statement ;  but  that  no  matter 
with  whom  it  had  originated,  he  was  fully  persuaded  it  was  a  gross  fabri- 
cation of  the  same  calumnious  character  with  the  Kremer  story,  put  forth 
for  the  double  purpose  of  injuring  his  public  character,  and  propping  the 
cause  of  General  Jackson  ;  and  then  for  himself  and  his  friends  he  defied 
the  substantiation  of  the  charge  before  any  fair  tribunal  whatever."  Such 
were  my  own  words,  transmitted  in  the  form  of  a  letter  from  a  friend  to  a 
known  person.  Whereas  the  charge  which  they  repelled  was  contained  in 
a  letter  written  by  a  person  then  unknown  to  some  person  also  unknown. 
Did  I  not  deny  the  charge  under  my  own  signature,  in  my  card  of  the 
31st  of  January,  1825,  published  in  the  National  Intelligencer?  Was  not 
there  a  substantial  denial  of  it  in  my  letter  to  Judge  Brooke,  dated  the 
28th  of  the  same  month  2  In  my  circular  to  my  constituents  2  In  my 
Lewisburg  speech  2  And  may  I  not  add,  in  the  whole  tenor  of  my  public 
life  and  conduct  2  If  General  Jackson  had  offered  to  furnish  me  the  name 
of  a  member  of  Congress,  who  was  capable  of  advising  his  acceptance  of 
a  base  and  corrupt  proposition,  ought  I  to  have  resorted  to  his  infamous 
and  discredited  witness  2 

It  has  been  a  thousand  times  asserted  and  repeated,  that  I  violated  in- 
structions which  I  ought  to  have  obeyed.  I  deny  the  charge ;  and  I  am 
happy  to  have  this  opportunity  of  denying  it  in  the  presence  of  my  assem- 
bled constituents.  The  General  Assembly  requested  the  Kentucky  delega- 
tion to  vote  in  a  particular  way.  A  majority  of  that  delegation,  including 
myself,  voted  in  opposition  to  that  request.  The  Legislature  did  not  intend 
to  give  an  imperative  instruction.  The  distinction  between  a  request  and 
an  instruction  was  familiar  to  the  Legislature,  and  their  rolls  attest  that  the 
former  is  always  addressed  to  the  members  of  the  House  of  Representatives, 
and  the  latter  only  to  the  Senators  of  the  United  States. 

But  I  do  not  rely  exclusively  on  this  recognized  distinction.  I  dispute 
at  once  the  right  of  the  Legislature  to  issue  a  mandatory  instruction  to  the 
representatives  of  the  people.  Such  a  right  has  no  foundation  in  the  Con- 
stitution, in  the  reason  or  nature  of  things,  nor  in  the  usage  of  the  Kentucky 
Legislature.  Its  exercise  would  be  a  manifest  usurpation.  The  General 
Assembly  has  the  incontrovertible  right  to  express  its  opinions  and  to  pro- 

23 


354  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

claim  its  wishes  on  any  political  subject  whatever ;  and  to  such  an  expres- 
sion great  deference  and  respect  are  due ;  but  it  is  not  obligatory.  The 
people,  when,  in  August,  1824,  they  elected  members  to  the  General  As- 
sembly, did  not  invest  them  with  any  power  to  regulate  or  control  the 
exercise  of  the  discretion  of  the  Kentucky  delegation  in  the  Congress  of 
the  United  States.  I  put  it  to  the  candor  of  every  elector  present,  if  he 
intended  to  part  with  his  own  right,  or  anticipated  the  exertion  of  any 
such  power,  by  the  Legislature,  when  he  gave  his  vote  in  August,  1824  ? 

The  only  instruction  which  I  received  from  a  legitimate  source,  emanated 
from  a  respectable  portion  of  my  immediate  constituents ;  and  that  directed 
me  to  exercise  my  own  discretion,  regardless  of  the  will  of  the  Legislature. 
You  subsequently  ratified  my  vote  by  unequivocal  demonstrations,  repeat- 
edly given,  of  your  affectionate  attachment  and  your  unshaken  confidence. 
You  ratified  it  two  years  ago,  by  the  election  of  my  personal  and  political 
friend  (Judge  Clarke)  to  succeed  me  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  who 
had  himself  subscribed  the  only  legitimate  instruction  which  I  received. 
You  ratify  it  by  the  presence  and  the  approbation  of  this  vast  and  respect- 
able assemblage. 

I  rejoice  again  and  again,  that  the  contest  has  at  last  assumed  its  pres- 
ent practical  form.  Heretofore,  malignant  whispers  and  dark  surmise 
have  been  clandestinely  circulated,  or  openly  or  unblushingly  uttered  by 
irresponsible  agents.  They  were  borne  upon  the  winds,  and  like  them 
were  invisible  and  intangible.  No  responsible  man  stood  forward  to  sus- 
tain them,  with  his  acknowledged  authority.  They  have  at  last  a  local 
habitation  and  a  name.  General  Jackson  has  now  thrown  off  the  mask, 
and  comes  confessedly  forth  from  behind  bis  concealed  batteries,  publicly 
to  accuse  and  convict  me.  We  stand  confronted  before  the  American 
people.  Pronouncing  the  charges,  as  I  again  do,  destitute  of  all  founda- 
tion, and  gross  aspersions,  whether  clandestinely  or  openly  issued  from  the 
halls  of  the  capitol,  the  saloons  of  the  Hermitage,  or  by  press,  by  pen,  or 
by  tongue,  and  safely  resting  on  my  conscious  integrity,  I  demanded  the 
witness,  and  await  the  event  with  fearless  confidence. 

The  issue  is  fairly  joined.  The  imputed  offense  does  not  comprehend  a 
single  friend,  but  the  collective  body  of  my  friends  in  Congress  ;  and  it  ac- 
cuses them  of  offering,  and  me  with  sanctioning,  corrupt  propositions, 
derogating  from  honor,  and  in  violation  of  the  most  sacred  duties.  The 
charge  has  been  made  after  two  years'  deliberation.  General  Jackson  has 
voluntarily  taken  his  position,  and  without  provocation.  In  voting  against 
him  as  President  of  the  United  States,  I  gave  him  no  just  cause  of  offense. 
I  exercised  no  more  than  my  indisputable  privilege,  as  on  a  subsequent 
occasion,  of  which  I  have  never  complaiued,  he  exercised  his  in  voting 
against  me  as  Secretary  of  State.  Had  I  voted  for  him,  I  must  have  gone 
counter  to  every  fixed  principle  of  my  public  life.  I  believed  him  incom- 
petent, and  his  election  fraught  with  danger.  At  this  early  period  of  the 
republic,  keeping  steadily  in  view  the  dangers  which  had  overturned  every 


BAKGAIN  AND   COKKUPTION.  355 

other  free  state,  I  believed  it  to  be  essential  to  the  lasting  preservation  of 
our  liberties,  that  a  man,  devoid  of  civil  talents,  and  offering  no  recom- 
mendation but  one  founded  on  military  service,  should  not  be  selected  to 
administer  the  government.  I  believe  so  yet ;  and  I  shall  consider  the 
days  of  the  commonwealth  numbered,  when  an  opposite  principle  is  estab- 
lished. I  believed,  and  still  believe,  that  now,  when  our  institutions  are  in 
comparative  infancy,  is  the  time  to  establish  the  great  principle,  that  mil- 
itary qualification  alone  is  not  a  sufficient  title  to  the  presidency.  If  we 
start  right,  we  may  run  a  long  race  of  liberty,  happiness,  and  glory.  If 
we  stumble  in  setting  out,  we  shall  fall  as  others  have  fallen  before  us,  and 
fall  without  even  a  claim  to  the  regrets  or  sympathies  of  mankind. 

I  have  never  done  General  Jackson,  knowingly,  any  injustice.  I  have 
taken  pleasure,  on  every  proper  occasion,  to  bestow  on  him  merited  praise, 
for  the  glorious  issue  of  the  battle  of  New  Orleans.  No  American  citizen 
enjoyed  higher  satisfaction  than  I  did  with  the  event.  I  heard  it  for  the 
first  time  on  the  boulevards  of  Paris ;  and  I  eagerly  perused  the  details 
of  the  actions,  with  the  anxious  hope  that  I  should  find  that  the  gallant 
militia  of  my  own  State  had  avenged,  on  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi,  the 
blood  which  they  had  so  freely  spilt  on  the  disastrous  field  of  Raisin. 
That  hope  was  not  then  gratified ;  and  although  I  had  the  mortification  to 
read  in  the  official  statement,  that  they  ingloriously  fled,  I  was  nevertheless 
thankful  for  the  success  of  the  arms  of  my  country,  and  felt  grateful  to 
him  who  had  most  contributed  to  the  ever-memorable  victory.  This  con- 
cession is  not  now  made  for  the  purpose  of  conciliating  the  favor  or  miti- 
gating the  wrath  of  General  Jackson.  He  has  erected  an  impassable 
barrier  between  us,  and  I  would  scorn  to  accept  any  favor  at  his  hands.  I 
thank  my  God  that  He  has  endowed  me  with  a  soul  incapable  of  appre- 
hensions from  the  anger  of  any  being  but  himself. 

I  have,  as  your  representative,  freely  examined,  and  in  my  deliberate 
judgment,  justly  condemned  the  conduct  of  General  Jackson  in  some 
of  our  Indian  wars.  I  believed  and  yet  believe  him  to  have  trampled 
upon  the  Constitution  of  his  country,  and  to  have  violated  the  principles 
of  humanity.  Entertaining  these  opinions,  I  did  not  and  could  not  vote  for 
him. 

I  owe  you,  my  friends  and  fellow-citizens,  many  apologies  for  this  long 
interruption  of  the  festivities  of  the  day.  I  hope  that  my  desire  to  vindicate 
their  honored  object,  and  to  satisfy  you  that  he  is  not  altogether  unworthy 
of  them,  will  bo  deemed  sufficient. 


DANGER  OF  THE  MILITARY  SPIRIT  IN  A 

REPUBLIC. 

BALTIMORE,  MAT  13,  1828. 

[The  last  of  four  years  was  now  in  transitu,  since  Mr.  Clay- 
had  committed  the  mortal  offense  of  using  his  vote  and  influence 
for  the  election  to  the  presidency  of  John  Quincy  Adams,  and 
since  he  had  entered  on  the  duties  of  Secretary  of  State.  The 
whole  of  this  time  had  been  occupied  by  General  Jackson  and 
his  party  in  endeavoring  to  convince  the  American  people  that 
the  hero  of  New  Orleans  had  been  deprived  of  his  just  rights  in 
the  election  of  Mr.  Adams,  by  a  bargain  between  Mr,  Clay  and 
Mr.  Adams.  They  would  not  consent  to  lose  the  benefit  of  this 
charge  by  accepting  a  challenge  to  prove  it,  as  they  knew  they 
must  fail  in  it.  All  they  would  say,  was  :  Mr.  Adams  was  made 
president,  and  Mr.  Clay  was  made  Secretary  of  State  ;  and  the 
charge  was,  that  they  had  bargained  with  each  other  for  these 
places  respectively.  This  charge  was  so  managed  that  a  major- 
ity of  the  people  believed  it,  and  waited  only  for  the  next  presi- 
dential election  to  avenge  the  wrongs  of  their  military  chieftain. 
In  such  a  contest,  the  military  spirit  took  possession  of  the  heart 
of  the  nation.  It  was  in  the  midst  of  this  campaign  that  the 
following  speech  was  delivered,  at  a  dinner  with  his  friends  at 
Baltimore,  in  reply  to  the  following  toasts  : 

1.  The  President  of  the  United  States. 

2.  A  great  statesman  has  said,  "  What  is  a  public  man  worth,  who  will 
not  suffer  for  his  country?"  We  have  seen  a  public  man  sacrifice  much 
for  his  country,  and  rise  resplendently  triumphant  over  the  calumnies  of  his 
enemies.] 

Mr.  Clay  then  rose,  and  said,  Although  I  have  been  required,  by  the 
advice  of  my  physicians,  to  abstain  from  all  social  entertainments,  with 
their  consequent  excitements,  I  can  not  leave  Baltimore,  without  saying  a 
few  words,  by  way  of  public  acknowledgment,  for  the  cordial  congratula- 
tions with  which  I  have  been  received  during  my  present  visit.  I  am  not 
bo  vain,  indeed,  as  to  imagine  that  any  personal  considerations   have 


DANGER   OF   THE   MILITARY   SPIRIT  IN  A   REPUBLIC.         357 

prompted  the  enthusiastic  demonstrations  by  which  my  approach  to  this 
city,  and  my  short  sojourn,  have  been  so  highly  distinguished.  Their 
honored  object,  has,  it  is  true,  some  claims  upon  the  justice,  if  not  the 
sympathy,  of  a  generous,  intelligent,  and  high-minded  people.  Singled 
out  for  proscription  and  destruction,  he  has  sustained  all  the  fury  of  the 
most  ferocious  attacks.  Calumnious  charges,  directed  against  the  honor 
of  his  public  character,  dearer  than  life  itself,  sanctioned  and  republished 
by  one  who  should  have  scorned  to  lend  himself  to  such  a  vile  purpose, 
have  been  echoed  by  a  thousand  profligate  or  deluded  tongues  and  presses. 
Supported  by  the  consciousness  of  having  faithfully  discharged  his  duty, 
and  defended  by  the  virtue  and  intelligence  of  an  enlightened  people,  he 
has  stood  firm  and  erect  amid  all  the  bellowings  of  the  political  storm. 
What  is  a  public  man,  what  is  any  man  worth,  who  is  not  prepared  to 
sacrifice  himself,  if  necessary,  for  the  good  of  his  country  ? 

But,  continued  Mr.  Clay,  the  demonstrations  which  I  have  here  wit- 
nessed, have  a  higher  and  a  nobler  source,  than  homage  to  an  individual : 
they  originate  from  that  cause  with  which  I  am  an  humble  associate — the 
cause  of  the  country — the  cause  of  the  Constitution — the  cause  of  free 
institutions.  They  would  otherwise  be  unworthy  of  freemen,  and  less 
gratifying  to  me.  I  am  not,  I  hope,  so  uncharitable  as  to  accuse  all  the 
opponents  of  that  cause  with  designs  unfriendly  to  human  liberty.  I 
know  that  they  make,  many  of  them  sincerely,  other  professions.  They 
talk,  indeed,  of  republicanism,  and  some  of  them  impudently  claim  to  be 
the  exclusive  republican  party !  Yes !  we  find  men  who,  but  yesterday, 
were  the  foremost  in  other  ranks,  upon  whose  revolting  ears  the  grating 
sound  of  republicanism  ever  fell,  and  upon  whose  lips  the  exotic  word  still 
awkwardly  hangs,  now  exclaiming,  or  acquiescing  in  the  cry,  that  they 
are  the  republican  party !  I  had  thought  if  any  one,  more  than  all  other 
principles,  characterized  the  term  republican  party,  it  was  their  ardent 
devotion  to  liberty,  to  its  safety,  to  all  its  guaranties.  I  had  supposed, 
that  the  doctrines  of  that  school  taught  us  to  guard  against  the  danger  of 
standing  armies,  to  profit  by  the  lessons  which  all  history  inculcates,  and 
never  to  forget  that  liberty  and  the  predominance  of  the  military  prin- 
ciple, were  utterly  incompatible.  The  republican  party  !  In  this  modern, 
new-fangled,  and  heterogeneous  party,  Cromwell  and  Caesar  have  recently 
found  apologists.  The  judgment  of  centuries  is  reversed  ;  long-established 
maxims  are  overturned ;  the  Ethiopian  is  washed  white ;  and  the  only 
genuine  lovers  of  liberty  were  the  Philips,  the  Caesars,  the  Crom wells, 
the  Mariuses,  and  the  Syllas,  of  former  ages. 

It  is  time  for  slumbering  patriotism  to  awake,  when  such  doctrines  as 
these  are  put  forth  from  the  capitol,  and  from  popular  assemblies.  It  is 
time  that  the  real  republican  party  (I  speak  not  of  former  divisions,  spring- 
ing from  causes  no  longer  existing,  and  which  are  sought  to  be  kept  up 
by  some  men  in  particular  places,  only  for  sinister  purposes) — that  party, 
under  whatever  flag  its  members  may  have  heretofore  acted,  that  party 


358  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

which  loves  freedom,  for  freedom's  sake — justly  to  estimate  the  impending 
perils,  and  to  proceed  with  an  energy,  and  union,  called  for  by  the  existing 
crisis  in  the  republic.  Regardless  of  all  imputations,  and  proud  of  the  op- 
portunity of  free  and  unrestrained  intercourse  with  all  my  fellow-citizens, 
if  it  were  physically  possible,  and  compatible  with  my  official  duties,  I 
would  visit  every  State,  go  to  every  town  and  hamlet,  address  every  man 
in  the  Union,  and  entreat  them,  by  their  love  of  country,  by  their  love  of 
liberty,  for  the  sake  of  themselves  and  their  posterity — in  the  name  of 
their  venerated  ancestors,  in  the  name  of  the  human  family,  deeply  inter- 
ested in  the  fulfillment  of  the  trust  committed  to  their  hands — by  all  the 
past  glory  which  we  have  won — by  all  that  awaits  us  as  a  nation — if  we 
are  true  and  faithful  in  gratitude  to  Him  who  has  hitherto  so  signally 
blessed  us — to  pause — solemnly  pause — and  contemplate  the  precipice 
which  yawns  before  us  !  If,  indeed,  we  have  incurred  the  divine  displeas- 
ure, and  it  be  necessary  to  chastise  this  people  with  the  rod  of  vengeance, 
I  would  humbly  prostrate  myself  before  Him,  and  implore  His  mercy,  to 
visit  our  favored  land  with  war,  with  pestilence,  with  famine,  with  any 
scourge  other  than  military  rule,  or  a  blind  and  heedless  enthusiasm  for 
mere  military  renown. 

Gentlemen,  I  wish  I  had  strength  to  expatiate  on  this  interesting  subject ; 
but  I  am  admonished  by  the  state  of  my  health,  to  desist.  I  pray  you  to 
accept  my  thanks  for  the  sentiment  with  which  you  have  honored  me,  and 
your  permission  to  offer  one  which  I  hope  will  be  approved  by  you : 

Genuine  Republicans,  of  every  faith,  who,  true  to  the  cause  of  liberty,  would 
guard  it  against  all  pernicious  examples. 


MR.  J,  Q,  ADAMS'S  ADMINISTRATION. 

CINCINNATI,  AUGUST   23,   1828. 

[The  following  speech  is  chiefly  devoted  to  a  vindication  of 
the  administration  of  Mr.  J.  Q.  Adams,  of  which  Mr.  Clay  was 
a  member.  Being  on  a  journey  from  Ashland  to  Washington, 
and  forced  to  take  Cincinnati  in  his  way,  he  could  not  avoid  the 
attentions  of  the  people,  who  thronged  by  thousands  to  see  and 
hear  him,  as  he  passed  through  Cincinnati.  It  was  now  the  eve 
of  the  presidential  election,  when  Mr.  Adams  and  General  Jack- 
son were  the  two  opposing  candidates.  Besides  the  great  staple 
of  Bargain  and  Corruption,  in  which  the  Jackson  party  traded 
bo  furiously,  Mr.  Adams's  administration  and  tariff  policy  were 
assailed — all  of  which,  as  will  be  seen,  are  noticed  by  Mr.  Clay.] 

Mr.  Chairman — Although  it  is  riot  entirely  compatible  with  the  pre- 
cautions which  are  enjoined  by  the  delicate  state  of  my  health,  to  which 
you  have  so  obligingly  alluded,  to  present  myself  in  this  attitude,  I  can  not 
refrain  from  making  a  public  expression  to  you,  and  to  my  fellow-citizens 
here  assembled,  of  my  profound  acknowledgments  for  the  hearty  welcome 
and  the  cordial,  spontaneous,  and  enthusiastic  manifestation  of  respect  and 
attachment  with  whioh  my  present  visit  to  your  city  has  been  attended. 
It  has  been  frequently,  but  not  less  truly  said,  that  the  highest  reward  for 
public  service,  is  the  approbation  of  the  public.  The  support  of  public 
opinion  is  the  greatest  incentive  to  the  faithful  and  beneficial  discharge  of 
official  duty.  If,  as  you  have  truly  suggested,  it  has  been  my  misfortune 
for  several  years  to  have  been  abused  and  assailed  without  example,  I  have 
nevertheless  had  the  satisfaction  to  have  been  cheered  and  sustained,  in  all 
parts  of  the  Union,  by  some  of  the  best  and  most  virtuous  men  in  it.  And 
I  seize  with  pleasure  this  occasion  to  say,  that  even  among  my  political 
opponents,  many  of  the  most  moderate  and  intelligent  have  done  me  the 
justice  to  discredit  and  discountenance  the  calumnies  of  which  I  have  been 
the  object.  But  nowhere  have  I  found  more  constant,  ardent,  and  effective 
friends,  than  in  this  city.  I  thank  them  most  heartily  for  all  their  friendly 
sentiments. and  exertions. 

Whatever  may  be  the  issue  of  the  contest  which  at  present  unhappily  di- 
vides and  distracts  our  country,  I  trust  that  the  beneficial  system,  to  which  you 


360  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

have  referred,  will  survive  the  struggle,  and  continue  to  engage  the  affections, 
and  to  cheer  and  animate  the  industry  of  the  people  of  the  United  States. 
It  has  indeed  been  recently  attacked  in  another  quarter  of  the  Union,  by 
some  of  our  fellow-citizens,  with  a  harshness  and  intemperance  which  must 
everywhere  excite  the  patriot's  regret.  It  has  been  denounced  as  if  it  were 
a  new  system,  tha,  sprung  into  existence  but  yesterday,  or  at  least  with 
the  present  administration,  if  not  during  the  last  session  of  Congress.  But 
it  owes  its  origin  to  a  much  earlier  date.  The  present  administration, 
though  sincerely  attached  to  it,  and  most  anxious  for  its  preservation,  has 
not  the  merit  of  having  first  proposed  or  first  established  it.  The  manu- 
facturing system  was  quickened  into  existence  by  the  commercial  restric- 
tions which  preceded  the  late  war  with  Great  Britain,  and  by  that  greatest 
of  them  all,  the  war  itself.  Our  wants,  no  longer  supplied  from  abroad, 
must  have  been  supplied  at  home,  or  we  must  have  been  deprived  of  the 
necessaries  and  comforts  of  civilization,  if  we  had  not  relapsed  into  a  state 
of  barbarism.  The  policy  of  Jefferson  and  Madison  fostered,  if  it  did  not 
create,  the  manufactures  of  our  country.  The  peace  brought  with  it  a 
glut  of  foreign  fabrics,  which  would  have  prostrated  our  establishments,  if 
government  had  been  capable  of  unjustly  witnessing  such  a  spectacle* 
without  interposing  its  protective  power.  Protection,  therefore,  was  not 
merely  called  for  by  the  substantial  independence  of  our  country,  but  it 
was  a  parental  duty  of  government  to  those  citizens  who  had  been  tempted 
by  its  restrictive  policy  to  embark  all  their  hopes  and  fortunes  in  the  bus- 
iness of  manufacturing.  Twelve  years  ago  Congress  took  up  the  subject* 
and  after  loug  and  mature  deliberation,  solemuly  decided  to  extend  that 
measure  of  protection  which  was  alike  demanded  by  sound  policy  and 
strict  justice.  Then  the  foundations  were  laid  of  the  American  system; 
and  all  that  has  been  subsequently  done,  including  the  act  of  the  last  ses- 
sion of  Congress,  are  but  the  consequences  of  the  policy  then  deliberately 
adopted,  having  for  their  object  the  improvement  and  perfection  of  the 
great  work  then  begun.  It  is  not  the  least  remarkable  of  the  circum- 
stances of  these  strange  times,  that  some  who  assisted  in  the  commence- 
ment, who  laid  corner-stones  of  the  edifice,  are  now  ready  to  pull  down 
and  demolish  it. 

It  is  not  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  an  opposition  to  the  tariff  that  can 
occasion  any  inquietude ;  nor  that  of  large  and  respectable  assemblies  of 
the  people,  to  express  their  disapprobation  of  the  policy,  and  their  firm 
resolution  to  consume  only  the  produce  of  their  own  industry.  These 
meetings  are  in  the  true  spirit  of  our  free  institutions,  and  that  resolution 
is  in  the  true  spirit  of  the  American  svstem  itself.  But  what  must  excite 
deep  regret  is,  that  any  persons  should  allow  themselves  to  speak  of  open 
and  forcible  resistance  to  the  government  of  their  country,  and  to  threaten 
a  dissolution  of  the  Union.  What  is  the  state  of  the  case  ?  A  great 
measure  of  national  policy  is  propose:! ;  it  is  a  subject  of  discussion  for  a 
period  of  twelve  years,  in  the  public  prints,  in  popular  assemblies,  in  polit- 


MR.    J.    Q.    ADAMS'S   ADMINISTRATION.  361 

ical  circles,  and  in  the  Congress  of  the  United  States.  That  body,  after 
hearing  the  wishes  and  wants  of  all  parts  of  the  Union,  fairly  stated  by 
their  respective  representatives,  decides  by  repeated  majorities,  to  adopt  the 
measure.  It  is  accordingly  put  into  successful  operation,  improved  from 
time  to  time,  and  is  rapidly  fulfilling  all  the  hopes  and  expectations  of  its 
friends.  In  this  encouraging  condition  of  things,  a  small  number  of  the 
citizens  composing  the  minority  (for  I  will  not  impute  to  the  great  body 
of  the  minority  any  such  violent  purposes),  threaten  the  employment 
of  force,  and  the  dissolution  of  the  Union !  Can  any  principle  be  more 
subversive  of  all  government,  or  of  a  tendency  more  exceptionable  and 
alarming.  It  amounts  to  this,  that  whenever  any  portion  of  the  com- 
munity finds  itself  in  a  minority,  in  reference  to  any  important  act  of  the 
government,  and  by  high  coloring  and  pictures  of  imaginary  distress,  can 
persuade  itself  that  the  measure  is  oppressive,  that  minority  may  appeal  to 
arms,  and  if  it  can,  dissolve  the  Union.  Such  a  principle  would  reverse  the 
established  maxim  of  representative  government,  according  to  which,  the 
will  of  the  majority  must  prevail.  If  it  were  possible  that  the  minority 
could  govern  and  control,  the  Union  may  be  indeed  as  well  be  dissolved; 
for  it  would  not  then  be  worth  preserving.  The  conduct  of  an  individual 
would  not  be  more  unwise  and  suicidal,  who,  because  of  some  trifling  dis- 
ease afflicting  his  person  should,  in  a  feverish  and  fretful  moment,  resolve 
to  terminate  his  existence. 

Nothing  can  be  more  unfair  and  ridiculous  than  to  compare  any  of  the 
acts  of  the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  representing  all,  and  acting 
for  all,  to  any  of  the  acts  of  the  British  Parliament  which  led  to  our 
Revolution.  The  principle  on  which  the  colonies  seceded  was,  that  there 
should  be  no  taxation  without  representation.  They  were  not  represented 
in  the  British  Parliament,  and  to  have  submitted  to  taxation  would  have 
been  to  have  submitted  to  slavery,  and  to  have  surrendered  the  most 
valuable  privileges  of  freemen.  If  the  colonies  had  been  fairly  represented 
in  the  British  Parliament,  and  equal  taxes,  alike  applicable  to  all  parts  of 
the  British  empire,  had  been  impossd  by  a  majority,  a  case  of  remote 
analogy  to  any  act  of  Congress  to  which  a  minority  is  opposed  might  be 
deduced  from  the  history  of  the  Revolution.  But  every  State  of  this  con- 
federacy is  fairly  represented,  and  has  the  faculty  of  being  fully  heard  in 
the  Congress  of  the  United  States.  The  representation  has  been  regulated 
by  a  joint  principle  of  distribution,  the  result  of  a  wise  spirit  of  mutual 
compromise  and  concession,  which  I  hope  never  to  see  disturbed,  of  which 
none  can  justly  complain,  and  least  of  all  those  citizens  who  have  resorted 
to  threats  of  an  appeal  to  arms  and  disunion. 

But  there  is,  I  hope  and  believe,  no  reason  to  apprehend  the  execution 
of  those  empty  threats.  The  good  sense,  the  patriotism,  and  the  high 
character  of  the  people  of  South  Carolina,  are  sure  guaranties  for  repress- 
ing, without  aid,  any  disorders,  should  any  be  attempted  within  her  limits. 
The  spirit  of  Marion,  and  Pickens,  and  Sumpter,  of  the  Rutledges,  the 


362  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

Pinckueys,  and  of  Lowndes,  yet  survives,  and  animates  the  high-minded 
Carolinians.  The  Taylors,  and  the  Williamses,  and  their  compatriots  of 
the  present  day,  will  be  able  to  render  a  just  account  of  all,  if  there  be  any 
who  shall  dare  to  raise  their  parricidal  hands  against  the  peace,  the  Con- 
stitution, and  the  union  of  the  States.  Rebuked  by  public  opinion — a 
sufficient  corrective — and  condemned  by  their  own  sober  reflections,  the 
treasonable  purpose  will  be  relinquished,  if  it  were  ever  seriously  contem- 
plated by  any. 

I  have  no  fears  for  the  permanency  of  our  Union,  while  our  liberties  are 
preserved.  It  is  a  tough  and  strong  cord,  as  all  will  find  who  shall  pre- 
sumptuously attempt  to  break  it.  It  has  been  competent  to  suppress  all 
the  domestic  insurrections,  and  to  carry  us  safely  through  all  the  foreign 
wars  with  which  we  have  been  afflicted  since  it  was  formed,  and  it  has 
come  out  of  each  with  more  strength,  and  greater  promise  of  durability. 
It  is  the  choicest  political  blessing  which,  as  a  people,  we  enjoy,  and  I  trust 
and  hope  that  Providence  will  permit  us  to  transmit  it,  unimpaired,  to  pos- 
terity, through  endless  generations. 

I  thank  you,  Mr.  Chairman,  for  the  flattering  opinion  which  you  have 
expressed  of  my  public  services,  and  especially  of  those  which  I  have  en- 
deavored to  render  to  the  West.  While  I  am  sensible  that  you  appreciate 
them  much  too  highly,  it  is  at  the  same  time  true,  that  I  have  sought,  on 
all  occasions  that  appeared  to  me  proper,  to  advance  the  interests  of  that 
section,  of  which  I  am  proud  to  be  a  citizen,  whenever  I  have  thought  it 
could  be  done  without  prejudice  to  the  predominant  interests  of  the  whole. 
I  have,  nevertheless,  in  several  important  instances,  given  my  most  zealous 
support  to  measures  (the  navy,  and  the  late  war,  for  example)  in  which 
the  West  could  not  be  regarded  as  having  any  distinct  or  other  interest, 
than  that  which  belongs  to  the  honor,  the  prosperity,  and  the  character,  of 
the  whole  confederacy.  During  the  short  period  of  the  present  adminis- 
tration, I  hope  I  may  be  permitted  to  say,  without  meaning  to  claim  for  it 
exclusive  merit,  that  more  has  been  done  and  recommended  for  the  West, 
than  ever  was  done  during  the  whole  preceding  period  of  our  present 
Constitution,  with  the  exception  only  of  the  acquisition  of  Louisiana,  under 
the  administration  of  Mr.  Jefferson.  I  have  not  strength  or  time  to  enter 
into  details  to  establish  the  geueral  proposition ;  but  those  who  will  take 
the  trouble  to  examine  the  appropriations  of  laud  and  of  money,  for  objects 
of  internal  improvement  and  education,  the  measures  which  have  been 
adopted  or  recommended,  in  respect  to  the  public  domain,  the  judiciary, 
and  so  forth,  will  find  that  proposition  fully  sustained. 

There  are  here  many  who,  by  a  too  flattering  estimate  of  my  capacity, 
decided  me  worthy  of  the  office  of  chief  magistrate,  and,  during  the  last 
presidential  canvass,  honored  me  with  their  support.  To  them  I  take  this 
occasion  to  say,  that,  if  instead  of  the  present  abused  chief  magistrate,  they 
had  obtained  the  preference,  the  measures  of  the  administration  would  not 
have  been,  in  any  essential  particular,  different  from  those  which  have  been 


MR.   J.    Q.    ADAMS'S    ADMINISTRATION.  363 

adopted.     All  the  principal  acts  and  measures  of  the  existing  administra- 
tion, have  met  with  my  hearty  and  humble  concurrence. 

Cultivating  a  farm  in  Kentucky,  and  having  other  objects  of  private 
concern,  I  have  found  it  necessary,  both  on  that  account,  and  the  relaxa- 
tion from  official  business,  indispensable  to  the  preservation  of  health,  an- 
nually to  visit  this  quarter  of  the  Union  during  the  period  of  my  connec- 
tion -with  the  executive  of  the  United  States.  In  these  visits,  I  have 
frequently  met  large  portions  of  my  fellow-citizens,  upon  their  friendly  and 
pressing  invitations.  My  object  has  been  called  in  question,  and  my  mo- 
tive assailed.  It  has  been  said,  that  my  purpose  was  electioneering.  If  it 
be  intended  to  charge  me  with  employing  improper  or  dishonorable  acts, 
to  secure  my  election,  I  deny  the  charge,  and  disclaim  the  purpose.  I  defy 
my  most  malignant  enemies  to  show  that  I  ever,  during  any  period  of  my 
life,  resorted  to  such  acts  to  promote  my  own  election,  or  that  of  any 
other  person.  I  have  availed  myself  of  these  assemblies,  and  of  other  op- 
portunities, to  defend  myself  against  an  accusation,  publicly  made,  and  a 
thousand  times  repeated.  I  had  a  right  to  do  this  by  the  immutable  laws 
of  self-defense.  My  addresses  to  the  public,  heretofore,  have  been  gener- 
ally strictly  defensive.  If  they  have  ever  given  pain  to  any  of  my  adver- 
saries, they  must  reproach  themselves  with  its  infliction.  There  is  one 
way,  and  but  one  way,  in  which  they  can  silence  me.  My  traducers  have 
attributed  to  me  great  facility  in  making  a  bargain.  Whether  I  possess  it 
or  not,  there  is  one  bargain  which,  for  their  accommodation,  I  am  willing 
to  enter  into  with  them.  If  they  will  prevail  upon  their  chief  to  acknowl- 
edge that  he  has  been  in  error,  and  has  done  me  injustice,  and  if  they  will 
cease  to  traduce  and  abuse  me,  I  will  no  longer  present  myself  before  pub- 
lic assemblies,  or  in  public  prints,  in  my  own  defense.  That  is  one  bar- 
gain which  I  have  no  expectation  of  being  able  to  conclude ;  for  men  who 
are  in  a  long-established  line  of  busiuess,  will  not  voluntarily  quit  their 
accustomed  trade,  and  acknowledge  themselves  bankrupts  to  honor,  decen- 
cy, and  truth. 

Some  who  have  persuaded  themselves  that  they  saw  in  my  occasional 
addresses  to  the  people,  incompatibility  with  the  dignity  and  reserve  be- 
longing to  the  office  I  hold,  I  know  not  according  to  what  standard,  (it  can 
hardly  be  any  deduced  from  a  popular  representative  government),  these 
gentlemen  have  regulated  their  opinions.  True  dignity  appeals  to  me  to 
be  independent  of  office  or  station.  It  belongs  to  every  condition  ;  but  if 
there  be  a  difference  between  private  and  public  life,  the  more  exalted  the 
station,  the  greater  is  the  obligation  of  the  public  functionary,  in  my  hum- 
ble judgment,  to  render  himself  amiable,  affable,  and  accessible.  The  pub- 
lic officer  who  displays  a  natural  solicitude  to  defend  himself  against  a 
charge  deeply  affecting  his  honor  and  his  character,  manifests,  at  the  same 
time,  a  just  respect  for  the  community.  It  is,  I  think,  an  erroneous  judg- 
ment of  the  nature  of  office,  and  its  relations,  to  suppose  that  it  imposes 
the  duty  on  the  officer,  of  abstracting  himself  from  society,  and  a  stiff  and 


364  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

stately  port.  Without,  I  hope,  forgetting  what  was  due  to  myself,  my 
habit,  throughout  life,  has  been  that  of  friendly,  free,  and  frank  intercourse 
with  my  fellow-citizens.  I  have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  change  my 
personal  identity  in  any  of  the  various  offices  through  which  I  have  passed, 
or  to  assume  a  new  character.  It  may  not  be  easy  to  draw  the  line,  as  to 
the  occasions  in  which  a  man  should  remain  silent,  or  defend  himself.  In 
the  general,  it  is  better  perhaps,  that  he  should  leave  his  public  acts,  and 
the  measures  which  he  espouses  or  carries,  to  their  own  vindication  ;  but  if 
his  integrity  be  questioned,  and  dishonorable  charges,  under  high  and  im- 
posing names,  be  preferred  against  hiin,  he  can  not  remain  silent  without 
a  culpable  insensibility  to  all  that  is  valuable  in  human  life. 

Sir,  I  feel  that  I  have  trespassed  too  much,  both  upon  you  and  myself. 
If  prudence  were  a  virtue  of  which  I  could  boast,  I  should  have  spared 
both  you  and  me.  But  I  could  not  deny  myself  the  gratification  of  ex- 
pressing my  thanks  to  my  Cincinnati  friends  for  the  numerous  instances 
which  I  have  experienced  of  their  kind  and  respectful  consideration.  I 
beg  you,  and  every  gentleman  here  attending,  to  accept  my  acknowledg- 
ments;  and  I  especially  owe  them  to  the  gentlemen  of  the  committee, 
who  did  me  the  honor  to  meet  me  at  Louisville,  and  accompany  me  to  this 
city.  Whatever  may  be  my  future  destiny,  while  my  faculties  are  pre- 
served, I  shall  cherish  a  proud  and  grateful  recollection  of  these  testimonies 
of  respect  and  attachment. 


ON    RETIRING    FROM    OFFICE. 

WASHINGTON,  MARCH  7,  1829. 

[When  Mr.  Clay  left  the  State  Department  for  home,  in  the 
spring  of  1829,  he  met  his  friends  at  a  dinner,  when  the  follow- 
ing toast  was  given : 

"  Health,  prosperity,  and  happiness  to  our  highly-valued  and  esteemed  guest 
and  fellow-citizen,  Henry  Clay.  Whatever  the  future  destination  of  his  life, 
he  has  done  enough  for  honor,  and  need  desire  no  higher  reward  than  the  deep- 
seated  affection  and  respect  of  liis  friends  and  his  country." 

To  which  Mr.  Clay  responded  as  follows.  His  allusion  to  Gen- 
eral Jackson,  and  the  dilemma  in  which  he  places  him,  will  be 
read  with  deep  interest.] 

In  rising,  Mr.  President,  to  ofter  my  respectful  acknowledgments  for  the 
honors  of  which  I  am  here  the  object,  I  must  ask  the  indulgence  of  your- 
self and  the  other  gentlemen  now™assembled,  for  an  unaffected  embarrass- 
ment, which  is  more  sensibly  felt  than  it  can  be  distinctly  expressed.  This 
city  has  been  the  theater  of  the  greater  portion  of  my  public  life.  Yon, 
and  others  whom  I  now  see,  have  been  spectators  of  my  public  course  and 
conduct.  You  and  they  are,  if  I  may  borrow  a  technical  expression  from 
an  honorable  profession  of  which  you  and  I  are  both  members,  jurors  of 
the  vicinage.  To  a  judgment  rendered  by  those  who  have  thus  loug  known 
me,  and  by  others  though  not  of  the  panel,  who  have  possessed  equal  op- 
portunities of  forming  correct  opinions,  I  most  cheerfully  submit.  If  the 
weight  of  human  testimony  should  be  estimated  by  the  intelligence  and 
repectability  of  the  witness,  and  the  extent  of  his  knowledge  of  the  matter 
on  which  he  testifies,  the  highest  consideration  is  due  to  that  which  has 
been  this  day  spontaneously  given.  I  shall  ever  cherish  it  with  the  most 
grateful  recollection,  and  look  back  upon  it  with  proud  satisfaction. 

I  should  be  glad  to  feel  that  I  could  with  any  propriety  abstain  from  any 
allusion  at  this  time  and  at  this  place,  to  public  affairs.  But  considering 
the  occasion  which  has  brought  us  together,  the  events  which  have  pre- 
ceded it,  and  the  influence  which  they  may  exert  upon  the  destinies  of  our 
country,  my  silence  might  be  misintei-preted,  and  I  think  it  therefore  proper 
that  I  should  embrace  this  first  public  opportunity  which  I  have  had  of 


366  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

saying  a  few  words,  since  the  termination  of  the  late  memorable  and  em- 
bittered contest.  It  is  far  from  my  wish  to  continue  or  revive  the  agitation 
with  which  that  contest  was  attended.  It  is  ended,  for  good  or  for  evil. 
The  nation  wants  repose.  A  majority  of  the  people  has  decided,  and  from 
their  decision  there  can  and  ought  to  he  no  appeal.  Bowing,  as  I  do,  with 
profound  respect  to  them,  and  to  this  exercise  of  their  sovereign  authority, 
I  may  nevertheless  be  allowed  to  retain  and  express  my  own  unchanged 
sentiments,  even  if  they  should  not  be  in  perfect  coincidence  with  theirs. 
It  is  a  source  of  high  gratification  to  me  to  believe  that  I  share  these  sen- 
timents in  common  with  more  than  half  a  million  of  freemen,  possessing  a 
degree  of  virtue,  of  intelligence,  of  religion,  and  of  genuine  patriotism, 
which,  without  disparagement  to  others,  is  unsurpassed,  in  the  same  num- 
ber of  men  in  this  or  any  other  country,  in  this  or  any  other  age. 

I  deprecated  the  election  of  the  present  President  of  the  United  States, 
because  I  believed  he  had  neither  the  temper,  the  experience,  nor  the 
attainments  requisite  to  discharge  the  complicated  and  arduous  duties  of 
chief  magistrate.     I  deprecated  it  still  more,  because  his  elevation,  I  be- 
lieved, would  be   the  result  exclusively  of  admiration   and  gratitude  for 
military  service,  without  regard  to  indispensable  civil  qualifications.     I  can 
neither  retract',  nor  alter,  nor  modify  any  opinion  which,  on  these  subjects, 
I  have  at  any  time  heretofore  expressed.    I  thought  I  beheld  in  his  election 
an  awful  foreboding  of  the  fate  which,  at  some  future  (I  pray  to  God  that, 
if  it  ever  arrive,  it  may  be  some  far  distant)  day,  was  to  befall  this  infant 
republic.     All  past  history  has  impressed  on  my  mind  this  solemn  appre- 
hension.    Nor  is  it  effaced  or  weakened  by  cotemporaneous  events  passing 
upon  our  own  favored  continent.     It  is  remarkable  that,  at  this  epoch,  at 
the  head  of  eight  of  the  nine  independent  governments  established  in  both 
Americas,  military  officers  have  been  placed,  or  have  placed  themselves. 
Geueral  Lavalle  has,  by  military  force,  subverted  the  republic  of  La  Plata. 
General  Santa  Cruz  is  the  chief  magistrate  of  Bolivia ;  Colonel  Pinto,  of 
Chili ;  General  Lamar  of  Peru ;  and  General  Bolivar,  of  Colombia.     Cen- 
tral America,  rent  in  pieces,  and  bleeding  at  every  pore,  from  wounds  in- 
flicted by  contending  military  factions,  is  under  the  alternate  sway  of  their 
chiefs.     In  the  government  of  our  nearest  neighbor,  an  election,  conducted 
according  to  all  the  requirements  of  their  Constitution,  has  terminated  with 
a  majority  of  the  States  in  favor  of  Pedfazza,  the  civil  candidate.     An  in- 
surrection wTas  raised  in  behalf  of  his  military  rival ;  the  cry,  not  exactly 
of  a  bargain,  but  of  corruption,  was  sounded ;  the  election  was  annulled, 
and  a  reform  effected   by  proclaiming  General   Guerrero,  having  only  a 
iniuority  of  the  States,  duly  elected  president.     The  thunders  from  the 
surrounding  forts,  and  the  acclamations  of  the  assembled  multitude,  on  the 
4th,  told  us  what  general  was  at  the  head  of  our  affairs.     It  is  true,  and 
in  this  respect  we  are  happier  than  some  of  the  American  States,  that  his 
election  has  not  been  brought  about  by  military  violence.     The  forms  of 
the  Constitution  have  yet  remained  inviolate. 


ON    RETIRING    FROM    OFFICE.  367 

In  re-asserting  the  opinions  which  I  hold,  nothing  is  further  from  my 
purpose  than  to  treat  with  the  slightest  disrespect  those  of  my  fellow- 
citizens,  here  or  elsewhere,  who  may  entertain  opposite  sentiments.  The 
fact  of  claiming  and  exercising  the  free  and  independent  expression  of  the 
dictates  of  my  own  deliberate  judgment,  affords  the  strongest  guaranty  of 
my  full  recognition  of  their  corresponding  privilege. 

A  majority  of  my  fellow-citizens,  it  would  seem,  do  not  perceive  the 
dangers  which  I  apprehend  from  the  example.  Believing  that  they  are  not 
real,  or  that  we  have  some  security  against  their  effect,  which  ancient  and 
modern  republics  have  not  found,  that  majority,  in  the  exercise  of  their  in- 
contestable right  of  suffrage,  have  chosen  for  chief  magistrate  a  citizen 
who  brings  into  that  high  trust  no  qualification  other  than  military 
triumphs. 

That  citizen  has  done  me  much  injustice — wanton,  unprovoked,  and  un- 
atoned  injustice.  It  was  inflicted,  as  I  must  ever  believe,  for  the  double 
purpose  of  gratifying  private  resentment  and  promoting  personal  ambition. 
When,  during  the  late  canvass,  he  came  forward  in  the  public  prints  under 
his  proper  name,  with  his  charge  against  me,  and  summoned  before  the 
public  tribunal  his  friend  and  his  only  witness  to  establish  it,  the  anxious 
attention  of  the  whole  American  people  was  directed  to  the  testimony 
which  that  witness  might  render.  He  promptly  obeyed  the  call  and  testi- 
fied to  what  he  knew.  He  could  say  nothing,  and  he  said  nothing,  which 
cast  the  slightest  shade  upon  my  honor  or  integrity.  What  he  did  say 
was  the  reverse  of  any  implication  of  me.  Then  all  just  and  impartial 
men,  all  who  had  faith  in  the  magnanimity  of  my  accuser,  believed  that 
he  would  voluntarily  make  a  public  acknowledgment  of  his  error.  How 
far  this  reasonable  expectation  has  been  fulfilled,  let  his  persevering  and 
stubborn  silence  attest.  But  my  relations  to  that  citizen  by  a  recent  event 
are  now  changed.  Ho  is  the  chief  magistrate  of  my  country,  invested 
with  large  and  extensive  powers,  the  administration  of  which  may  conduce 
to  its  prosperity  or  occasion  its  adversity.  Patriotism  enjoins  as  a  duty, 
that  while  he  is  in  that  exalted  station,  he  should  be  treated  with  decorum, 
and  his  official  acts  be  judged  of  in  a  spirit  of  candor.  Suppressing,  as 
far  as  I  can,  a  sense  of  my  personal  wrong ;  willing  even  to  forgive  him, 
if  his  own  conscience  and  our  common  God  can  acquit  him  ;  and  en- 
tertaining for  the  majority  which  has  elected  him,  and  for  the  office  which 
he  fills,  all  the  deference  which  is  due  from  a  private  citizen  ;  I  most  anx- 
iously hope,  that  under  his  guidance  the  great  interests  of  our  country, 
foreign  and  domestic,  may  be  upheld,  our  free  institutions  be  unimpaired, 
and  the  happiness  of  the  nation  be  continued  and  increased. 

While  I  am  prompted  by  an  ardent  devotion  to  the  welfare  of  my  coun- 
try, sincerely  to  express  this  hope,  I  make  no  pledges,  no  promises,  no  threats, 
and  I  must  add,  I  have  no  confidence.  My  public  life,  I  trust,  furnishes 
the  best  guaranty  for  my  faithful  adherence  to  those  great  principles  of 
external  and  internal  policy,  to  which  it  has  been  hitherto  zealously  dedi- 


368  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

cated.  Whether  I  shall  ever  hereafter  take  any  part  in  the  public  coun- 
cils or  not,  depends  upon  circumstances  beyond  my  control.  Holding  the 
principle  that  a  citizen,  as  long  as  a  single  pulsation  remains,  is  under  an 
obligation  to  exert  his  utmost  energies  in  the  service  of  his  country,  if 
necessary,  whether  in  private  or  public  station,  my  friends,  here  and  every- 
where, may  rest  assured  that,  in  either  condition,  I  shall  stand  erect,  with 
a  spirit  uuconquered,  while  life  endures,  ready  to  second  their  exertions  in 
the  cause  of  liberty,  the  Union,  and  the  national  prosperity. 

Before  I  sit  down,  I  avail  myself  with  pleasure  of  this  opportunity  to 
make  ray  grateful  acknowledgments,  for  the  courtesies  and  friendly  atten- 
tions which  I  have  uniformly  experienced  from  the  inhabitants  of  this  city. 
A  free  and  social  intercourse  with  them,  during  a  period  of  more  than 
twenty  years,  is  about  to  terminate,  without  any  recollection  on  my  part 
of  a  single  painful  collision,  and  without  leaving  behind  me,  as  far  as  I 
know,  a  solitary  personal  enemy.  If,  in  the  sentiment  with  which  I  am 
about  to  conclude,  I  do  not  give  a  particular  expression  to  the  feelings  in- 
spired by  the  interchange  of  civilities  and  friendly  offices,  I  hope  the 
citizens  of  Washington  will  be  assured  that  their  individual  happiness  and 
the  growth  and  prosperity  of  this  city  will  ever  be  objects  of  my  fervent 
wishes.  In  the  sentiment  which  I  shall  presently  offer,  they  are  indeed 
comprehended.  For  the  welfare  of  this  city  is  indissolubly  associated  with 
that  of  our  Union,  and  the  preservation  of  our  liberty,  I  request  permis- 
sion to  propose, 

Let  us  Never  Despair  of  the  American  Republic. 


BEGINNING  OF  JACKSON'S  ADMINISTRATION. 

LEXINGTON,  MAY  16,   1829. 

[The  following  speech  will  be  read  with  interest  on  several 
accounts.  It  finds  Mr.  Clay  in  private  life,  after  the  labors  of 
four  years  in  the  State  Department,  and  after  four  years  of  a 
relentless  persecution,  in  which  he  was  chased,  as  a  pack  of 
hounds,  with  open  mouth,  chase  their  game  in  the  forest — with 
this  difference,  that  Mr.  Clay  was  not  run  down.  But  the  bark- 
ing never  ceased — never  relaxed — but  was  more  noisy  and  earn- 
est to  the  last.  Why  Mr.  Adams  should  not  have  had  an  equal 
share  as  an  object  of  this  hot  pursuit,  having  been  equal  in  the 
offense,  as  charged,  was  probably  because  he  was  less  formidable 
as  a  rival  of  General  Jackson.  In  killing  Mr.  Clay,  for  the 
reasons  assigned,  they  of  course  disposed  of  Mr.  Adams.  All 
the  hostile  batteries  of  this  four  years'  contest  were  pointed  di- 
rectly at  Mr.  Clay.  The  battle  over,  and  General  Jackson  presi- 
dent, Mr.  Clay  finds  himself  in  private  life,  with  no  views  or 
aspirations  for  the  future,  if  we  may  judge  from  what  he  said  on 
this  occasion.  For  the  present,  he  declines  all  the  wishes  of  his 
former  constituents,  to  return  to  Congress,  or  to  go  into  the 
State  Legislature,  where,  at  this  time,  he  was  especially  needed. 
But  his  health  was  seriously  impaired,  and  he  needed  repose. 
His  private  affairs,  too,  required  his  attention. 

But  his  old  constituents  wanted  to  hear  him  speak  on  public 
affairs,  and  they  gave  him  a  public  dinner  at  Fowler's  Garden, 
where  an  immense  concourse  assembled  to  meet  him,  on  the 
16th  of  May,  a  little  over  two  months  after  General  Jackson's 
inauguration.  Many  of  his  political  opponents  were  there, 
who  meekly  received  what  he  had  to  say  of  their  military  chief- 
tain, who  had  not  been  two  months  in  power  without  using  it  as 
no  other  chief  magistrate  had  ever  done,  and  which  Mr.  Clay 
was  forced  to  notice  with  severe  animadversion.  General  Jack- 
son had  commenced  a  system  of  removal  from  office  and  of  ap- 
pointments on  a  large  scale,  to  give  the  places  made  vacant  to 

24 


370  SPEECHES    OF    HENEY    CLAY. 

those  who  had  served  him  personally.  It  was  a  bold  innovation 
in  the  history  of  the  government,  which  Mr.  Clay  thought  would 
be  of  pernicious  consequence  ;  and  so  it  has  proved  ;  for  the 
practice,  since  that  time,  has  been,  for  every  new  administration 
of  different  politics  from  the  preceding  one,  to  clear  out  the  in- 
cumbents of  office,  who  have  served  their  apprenticeship,  and 
become  qualified  to  serve  the  country,  and  instal  in  their  places 
men  who,  in  their  turn,  after  having  learned  to  do  their  work, 
are  also  superseded  on  the  incoming  of  a  new  administration. 
Even  foreign  ministers  are  changed,  at  great  expense  to  the 
country,  by  means  of  allowances  made  for  new  outfits  and  the 
duplication  of  salaries.  In  this  way,  the  expenses  of  the  foreign 
ministers  of  the  country  are  nearly  or  quite  doubled  over  and 
above  the  intention  of  law,  and  the  government  is  represented 
abroad  by  men  sometimes  almost  totally  unfit  for  their  stations, 
till  our  foreign  diplomatic  agents  have  sunk  to  the  lowest  grade 
of  respectability,  and  become  the  subjects  of  contempt  among 
the  skilled  diplomatists  of  other  nations.  In  this  manner,  both 
the  home  and  foreign  service  of  our  government  has  become 
the  poorest  in  the  world — all  from  this  innovation  of  General 
Jackson,  which  forms  so  considerable  a  topic  of  the  following 
speech. 

The  Ostend  Manifesto  is  a  notable  and  disgraceful  instance  of 
American  diplomacy — which,  indeed,  is  no  diplomacy  at  all,  but 
a  violation  of  all  rules  of  the  art.  The  high  art  of  diplomacy 
is  to  conceal,  not  to  divulge,  the  policy  of  the  nation  represent- 
ed ;  whereas  this  Ostend  Manifesto  is  entirely  without  the  pale 
of  diplomacy,  being  a  gratuitous  and  shameful  exposure  of  a 
policy  which  should  never  have  been  named,  even  if  it  had  been 
entertained.  Foreign  ministers,  departing  in  this  maimer  from 
the  specific  instructions  given  them  to  the  governments  whither 
they  were  sent,  and  exposing  the  policy  of  their  country  to  a 
universal  reprobation  of  all  the  world,  should  have  been  in- 
stantly recalled,  and  suitably  rebuked  for  going  outside  of  their 
instructions,  and  publishing  to  the  world  what  will  forever  be 
the  shame  of  the  American  nation.  To  such  a  humiliating 
depth  of  infamy  have  our  foreign  diplomatists  brought  us — all 
for  being  ignorant  of  the  art  of  diplomacy.  We  could  better 
afford  a  bad  home  service,  by  this  frequent  turning  out  of  men 
who  have  just  learned  to  fill  their  places,  and  the  putting  in  of 
persons  totally  unqualified  for  their  duties.  But  for  a  nation  to 
be  subject  to  both  these  evils,  to  such  an  alarming  extent,  is  a 


BEGINNING   OF   JACKSON'S   ADMINISTRATION.  371 

cost  which  no  nation  can  long  endure — certainly  ought  not  to 
be  doomed  to,  when  it  can  be  better  served,  both  at  home  and 
abroad.  The  introduction  of  this  pernicious  system  is  well  ex- 
posed by  Mr.  Clay,  in  reply  to  the  following  toast,  given  to  his 
honor  on  this  occasion  : 

"Our  distinguished  guest,  friend,  and  neighbor,  Henry  Clay  :  with  increased 
proofs  of  his  worth,  we  delight  to  renew  the  assurance  of  our  confidence  in 
his  patriotism,  talents,  and  incorruptibility.  May  health  and  happiness  attend 
him  in  retirement,  and  a  grateful  nation  do  justice  to  his  virtues-"] 

I  fear,  friends  and  fellow-citizens,  that  if  I  could  find  language  to  ex- 
press the  feelings  which  now  animate  me,  I  could  not  be  heard  throughout 
this  vast  assembly.  My  voice,  once  strong  and  powerful,  has  had  its  vigor 
impaired  by  delicate  health  and  advancing  age.  You  must  have  been 
separated,  as  I  have  been,  for  four  years  past,  from  some  of  your  best  and 
dearest  friends,  with  whom  during  the  greater  part  of  your  lives,  you  had 
associated  in  the  most  intimate  friendly  intercourse  ;  you  must  have  been 
traduced,  as  I  have  been,  after  exerting  with  zeal  and  fidelity  the  utmost 
of  your  powers  to  promote  the  welfare  of  our  country  ;  and  you  must  have 
returned  among  those  warm-hearted  friends,  and  been  greeted  and  wel- 
comed and  honored  by  them,  as  I  have  recently  been,  before  you  could 
estimate  the  degree  of  sensibility  which  I  now  feel,  or  conceive  how  utterly 
inadequate  all  human  language  is  to  portray  the  grateful  emotions  of  my 
heart.  I  behold  gathered  here,  as  I  have  seen  in  other  instances  since  my 
return  among  you,  sires  far  advanced  in  years,  endeared  to  me  by  inter- 
change of  friendly  office  and  sympathetic  feeling  beginning  more  than 
thirty  years  ago.  Their  sons,  grown  up  during  my  absence  in  the  public 
councils,  accompanying  them  ;  and  all,  prompted  by  ardent  attachment, 
affectionately  surrounding  and  saluting  me,  as  if  I  belonged  to  their  own 
household.  Considering  the  multitude  here  assembled,  their  standing  and 
respectability,  and  the  distance  which  many  have  come  personally  to  see 
me,  and  to  testify  their  respect  and  confidence,  I  consider  this  day  and  this 
occasion  as  the  proudest  of  my  life.  The  tribute,  thus  rendered  by  my 
friends,  neighbors,  and  fellow-citizens,  flows  spontaneously  from  their 
hearts,  as  it  penetrates  the  inmost  recesses  of  mine.  Tendered  in  no  ser- 
vile spirit,  it  does  not  aim  to  propitiate  one  in  authority.  Power  could  not 
buy  or  coerce  it.  The  offspring  of  enlightened  and  independent  freemen, 
it  is  addressed  to  a  beloved  fellow-citizen  in  private  life,  without  office, 
and  who  can.  present  nothing  in  return  but  his  hearty  thanks.  I  pray  all 
of  you,  gentlemen,  to  accept  these.  They  are  due  to  every  one  of  you  for 
the  sentiment  just  pronounced,  and  for  the  proceedings  of  this  day.  And 
I  owe  a  particular  expression  of  them  to  that  portion  of  my  friends,  who, 
although  I  had  the  misfortune  to  differ  from  them  in  the  late  contest,  have 


372  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

honored  me  by  their  attendance  here.  I  have  no  reproaches  to  make  them. 
Regrets  I  have ;  but  I  give,  as  I  have  received  from  them,  the  hand  of 
friendship  as  cordially  as  it  is  extended  to  any  of  my  friends.  It  is  highly 
gratifying  to  me  to  know,  that  they,  and  thousands  of  others  who  co-oper- 
ated with  them  in  producing  the  late  political  change,  were  unaffected 
toward  me  by  the  prejudice  attempted  to  be  excited  against  me.  I  enter- 
tain too  high  respect  for  the  inestimable  privilege  of  freely  exercising  one's 
independent  judgment  on  public  affairs,  to  draw  in  question  the  right  of 
any  of  my  fellow-citizens  to  form  and  to  act  upon  their  opinions  in  oppo- 
sition to  mine.  The  best  and  wisest  among  us  are,  at  best,  but  weak  and 
fallible  human  beings.  And  no  man  ought  to  set  up  his  own  judgment  as 
an  unerring  standard,  by  which  the  correctness  of  all  others  is  to  be  tested 
and  tried. 

It  can  not  be  doubted  that,  with  individual  exceptions,  the  great  body 
of  every  political  party  that  has  hitherto  appeared  in  this  country,  has 
been  honest  in  its  intentions,  and  patriotic  in  its  aims.  Whole  parties 
may  have  been  sometimes  deceived  and  deluded,  but  without  being  con- 
scious of  it;  they  no  doubt  sought  to  advance  the  welfare  of  the  country. 
Where  such  a  contest  has  existed  as  that  which  we  have  recently  witnessed, 
there  will  be  prejudices  on  the  one  side,  and  predilections  on  the  other. 
If,  during  its  progress,  we  can  not  calm  the  passions,  and  permit  truth  and 
reason  to  have  their  undisturbed  sway,  we  ought,  at  least,  after  it  has 
terminated,  to  own  their  empire.  Judging  of  public  men  and  public 
measures  in  a  spirit  of  candor,  we  should  strive  to  eradicate  every  bias,  and 
to  banish  from  our  minds  every  consideration  not  connected  with  the  good 
of  our  country. 

I  do  not  pretend  to  be,  more  than  other  men,  exempt  from  the  influence 
of  prejudice  and  predilection.  But  I  declare  most  sincerely,  that  I  have 
sought,  in  reference  to  the  present  administration,  and  shall  continue  to 
strive,  to  discard  all  prejudices,  and  to  judge  its  acts  and  measures  as  they 
appear  to  me  to  affect  the  interests  of  our  country. 

A  large  portion  of  my  friends  and  fellow-citizens,  from  whom  I  differed 
on  the  late  occasion,  did  not  disagree  with  me  as  to  the  foreign  or  domestic 
policy  of  government.  We  only  differed  in  the  selection  of  agents  to 
carry  that  policy  into  effect.  Experience  can  alone  determine  who  was 
right.  If  that  policy  continues  to  be  pursued  under  the  new  administra- 
tion, it  shall  have  as  cordial  support  from  me,  as  if  its  care  had  been  con- 
fided to  agents  of  my  choice.  If,  on  the  contrary,  it  shall  be  neglected  or 
abandoned,  the  friends  to  whom  I  now  refer  will  be  bound  by  ail  the  obli- 
gations of  patriotism  and  consistency  to  adhere  to  the  policy. 

We  take  a  new  commencement  from  the  4th  of  March  last.  After  that 
day,  those  who  supported  the  election  of  the  present  chief  magistrate 
were  left  as  free  to  judge  of  the  conduct  of  its  administration,  as  those 
who  opposed.  It  will  be  no  more  inconsistent  iu  them,  if  it  disappoint 
their  expectations,  to  disapprove  his  administration,  than  it  will  be  to  sup* 


BEGINNING   OF  JACKSON'S    ADMINISTRATION.  373 

port  it,  if,  disappointing  ours,  he  should  preserve  the  established  policy  of 
the  nation,  aud  introduce  no  new  principles  of  alarming  tendency. 

They  bestowed  their  suffrages  upon  the  supposition  that  the  government 
would  be  well  administered  ;  that  public  pledges  would  be  redeemed, 
solemn  professions  be  fulfilled,  and  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  people 
be  protected  and  maintained.  If  they  shall  find  themselves  deceived  in 
any  of  these  respects  ;  should  principles  avowed  during  the  canvass  be 
violated  during  the  presidency,  and  new  principles  of  dangerous  import, 
neither  avowed  to  nor  anticipated  by  them,  be  put  forth,  they  will  have 
been  betrayed  ;  the  distinguished  individual  for  whom  they  voted  will  have 
failed  to  preserve  his  identity,  and  they  will  be  urged  by  the  most  sacred 
of  duties  to  apply  the  proper  corrective. 

Government  is  a  trust,  and  the  officers  of  government  are  trustees ;  and 
both  the  trust  and  the  trustees  are  created  for  the  benefit  of  the  people. 
Official  incumbents  are  bound,  therefore,  to  administer  the  trust,  not  for 
their  own  private  or  individual  benefits,  but  so  as  to  promote  the  prosperity 
of  the  people.  This  is  the  vital  principle  of  a  republic.  If  a  different 
principle  prevail,  and  a  government  be  so  administered  as  to  gratify  the 
passions  or  to  promote  the  interests  of  a  particular  individual,  the  forms  of 
free  institutions  may  remain,  but  that  government  is  essentially  a  monarchy. 
The  great  difference  between  the  two  forms  of  government  is,  that  in  a 
republic  all  power  and  authority,  and  all  public  offices  and  honors,  emanate 
from  the  people,  aud  are  exercised  and  held  for  their  benefit.  In  a 
monarchy,  all  power  and  authority,  all  offices  and  honors,  proceed  from 
the  monarch.  His  interests,  his  caprices,  and  his  passions,  influence  and 
control  the  destinies  of  the  kingdom.  In  a  republic,  the  people  are  every 
thing,  and  a  particular  individual  nothing.  In  a  monarchy,  the  monarch 
is  every  thing,  and  the  people  nothing.  And  the  true  character  of  the 
government  is  stamped,  not  by  the  forms  of  the  appointment  to  office 
alone,  but  by  its  practical  operation.  If  in  one,  nominally  free,  the  chief 
magistrate,  as  soon  as  he  is  clothed  with  power,  proceeds  to  exercise  it,  so 
as  to  minister  to  his  passions,  and  to  gratify  his  favorites,  and  systematically 
distributes  his  rewards  and  punishments,  in  the  application  of  the  power 
of  patronage,  with  which  he  is  invested  for  the  good  of  the  whole,  upon 
the  principle  of  devotion  and  attachment  to  him,  and  not  accordino-  to 
the  ability  and  fidelity  with  which  the  people  are  or  may  be  served,  that 
chief  magistrate,  for  the  time  being,  and  within  the  scope  of  his  discre- 
tionary powers,  is  iu  fact,  if  not  in  form,  a  monarch. 

It  was  objected  to  the  late  administration,  that  it  adopted  and  enforced 
a  system  of  proscription.  During  the  whole  period  of  it,  not  a  solitary  of- 
ficer of  the  government,  from  Maine  to  Louisiana,  within  my  knowledge, 
was  dismissed  on  account  of  his  political  opinions.  It  was  well  known  to 
the  late  president,  that  many  officers,  who  held  their  places  subject  to  the 
power  of  dismission,  were  opposed  to  his  re-election,  and  were  actively  em- 
ployed in  behalf  of  his  competitor.     Yet  not  one  was  discharged  from  that 


"6 


374  SPEECHES   OF    HENKY   CLAY. 

cause.  In  the  commencement  and  early  part  of  his  administration,  appoint- 
ments were  promiscuously  made  from  all  the  parties  in  the  previous  canvass. 
And  this  course  was  pursued  until  an  opposition  was  organized,  which 
denounced  all  appointments  from  its  ranks  as  being  made  for  impure  pur- 
poses. 

I  am  aware  that  it  may  be  urged,  that  a  change  was  made  in  some  of 
the  publishers  of  the  laws.  There  are  about  eighty  annually  designated. 
Of  these,  during  the  four  years  of  the  late  administration,  about  twelve  or 
fifteeen  were  changed.  Some  of  the  changes  were  made  from  geographi- 
cal or  other  local  considerations.  In  several  instances  one  friend  was  sub- 
stituted for  another.     Iu  others,  one  opponent  for  another. 

Several  papers,  among  the  most  influential  in  the  opposition,  but  other- 
wise conducted  with  decorum,  were  retained.  Of  the  entire  number  of 
changes,  not  more  than  four  or  five  were  made  because  of  the  scurrilous 
character  of  their  papers,  and  not  on  account  of  the  political  sentiments  of 
the  editors.  It  was  deemed  injurious  to  the  respect  and  moral  influence, 
which  the  laws  should  always  command,  that  they  should  be  promulgated 
in  the  columns  of  a  public  paper,  parallel  with  which  were  other  columns) 
in  the  same  paper,  of  the  grossest  abuse  of  the  government  and  its  func- 
tionaries. 

On  this  subject  I  can  speak  with  certainty,  and  I  embrace  with  pleasure 
this  opportunity  for  explanation.  The  duty  of  designating  the  printers  of 
the  laws  appertains  to  the  office  which  I  lately  filled.  The  selection  is 
usually  made  at  the  commencement  of  every  session  of  Congress.  It  was 
made  by  me,  without  any  particular  consultation  with  the  president,  or  any 
member  of  his  cabinet.  In  matins  it,  I  felt  under  no  Greater  obligation  to 
select  the  publisher  of  the  la-  s  of  the  previous  year,  than  an  individual 
feels  himself  bound  to  insert  a  succeeding  advertisement  in  the  same  paper 
which  published  his  last.  The  law  does  not  require  it,  but  leaves  the  Sec- 
retary of  State  at  liberty  to  make  the  selection  according  to  his  sense  of 
propriety.  A  publisher  of  the  laws  is  not  an  officer  of  the  government.  It 
has  been  judicially  so  decided.  He  holds  no  commission.  The  accuracy 
of  the  statement,  therefore,  that  no  officer  of  the  government  was  dismissed 
by  the  late  administration,  in  consequence  of  his  political  opinions,  is  not 
impaired  by  the  few  changes  of  publishers  of  the  laws  which  were  made. 

But  if  they  had  been  officers  of  government,  who  could  have  imagined 
that  those  who  objected  to  the  removal,  would  so  soon  have  themselves  put 
in  practice  a  general  and  sweeping  system  of  exclusion. 

The  president  is  invested  with  the  tremendous  power  of  dismission,  to  be 
exercised  for  the  public  good,  and  not  to  gratify  any  private  passions  or 
purposes.  It  was  conferred  to  prevent  the  public  from  suffering  through 
faithless  or  incompetent  officers.  It  was  made  summary  because,  if  the 
slow  progress  of  trial  before  a  judicial  tribunal  were  resorted  to,  the  public 
might  be  greatly  injured  during  the  progress  and  prior  to,  the  decision  of 
the  case.     But  it  never  was  in  the  contemplation  of  Congress,  that  the 


BEGINNING   OF    JACKSON'S    ADMINISTRATION.  375 

power  would  or  could  be  applied  to  the  removal  of  competent,  diligent, 
and  faithful  officers.  Such  an  application  of  it  is  an  act  of  arbitrary  power, 
and  a  great  abuse. 

I  regret  extremely  that  I  feel  constrained  to  notice  the  innovation  upon 
the  principles  and  practice  of  our  institutions  now  in  progress.  I  had  most 
anxiously  hoped,  that  I  could  heartily  approve  the  acts  and  measures  of 
the  new  administration.  And  I  yet  hope  that  it  will  pause,  and  hereafter 
pursue  a  course  more  in  unison  with  the  spirit  of  a  free  government.  I  en- 
treat my  friends  and  fellow-citizens,  here  and  elsewhere,  to  be  persuaded 
that  I  now  perform  a  painful  duty ;  and  that  it  is  far  from  my  wish  to  say 
one  word  that  can  inflict  any  wound  upon  the  feelings  of  any  of  them.  I 
think,  indeed,  that  it  is  the  duty  of  all  of  them  to  exercise  their  judgments 
freely  and  independently  on  what  is  passing;  and  that  none  ought  to  feel 
themselves  restrained,  by  false  pride,  or  by  any  part  which  they  took  in  the 
late  election,  from  condemning  what  their  hearts  can  not  approve. 

Knowing  the  imputations  to  which  I  expose  myself,  I  would  remain  si- 
lent if  I  did  not  solemnly  believe  that  there  was  serious  cause  of  alarm  in  the 
principle  of  removal,  which  has  been  recently  acted  on.  Hitherto,  the  uni- 
form practice  of  the  government  has  been,  where  charges  are  preferred 
against  public  officers,  foreign  or  domestic,  to  transmit  to  them  a  copy  of 
the  charges,  for  the  purpose  of  refutation  or  explanation.  This  has  been 
considered  an  equitable  substitute  to  the  more  tedious  and  formal  trials 
before  judicial  tribunals.  But  now,  persons  are  dismissed,  not  only  with- 
out trial  of  any  sort,  but  without  charge.  And,  as  if  the  intention  were  to 
defy  public  opinion,  and  to  give  to  the  acts  of  power  a  higher  degree  of 
enormity,  in  some  instances  the  persons  dismissed  have  carried  with  them, 
in  their  pockets,  the  strongest  testimonials  to  their  ability  and  integrity, 
furnished  by  the  very  instruments  employed  to  execute  the  purposes  of 
oppression.  If  the  new  administration  had  found  these  discharged  officers 
wanting  in  a  zealous  co-operation  to  execute  the  laws,  in  consequence  of 
their  preference  at  the  preceding  election,  there  would  have  been  ground 
for  their  removal.  But  this  has  not  been  pretended  ;  and  to  show  that  it 
formed  no  consideration,  they  have  been  dismissed  among  its  first  acts,  with- 
out affording  them  an  opportunity  of  manifesting  that  their  sense  of  public 
duty  was  unaffected  by  the  choice  which  they  had  at  the  preceding  election. 

I  will  not  dwell  on  the  injustice  and  individual  distress  which  are  the 
necessary  consequences  of  these  acts  of  authority.  Men  who  accepted 
public  employments  entered  on  them  with  the  implied  understanding,  that 
they  would  be  retained  as  long  as  they  continued  to  discharge  their  duties 
to  the  public  honestly,  ably,  and  assiduously.  All  their  private  airange- 
ments  are  made  accordingly.  To  be  dismissed  without  fault,  and  without 
trial;  to  be  expelled,  with  their  families,  without  the  means  of  support, 
and  in  some  instances  disqualified  by  age  or  by  official  habits  from  the 
pursuit  of  any  other  business,  and  all  this  to  be  done  upon  the  will  of  one 
man,  in  a  free  government,  was  surely  intolerable  oppression. 


376  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

Our  institutions  proclaim,  reason  enjoins,  and  conscience  requires,  that 
every  freeman  shall  exercise  the  elective  franchise  freely,  and  independ- 
ently ;  and  that  among  the  candidates  for  his  suffrage,  he  shall  fearlessly 
bestow  it  upon  him  who  will  best  advance  the  interests  of  his  country. 
The  presumption  is,  that  this  is  always  done,  unless  the  contrary  appears. 
But  if  the  consequence  of  such  a  performance  of  patriotic  duty  is  to  be 
punishment ;  if  an  honest  and  sincere  preference  of  A.  to  J.  is  to  be  treated 
as  a  crime,  then  our  dearest  privilege  is  a  mockery,  and  our  institutions 
are  snares. 

During  tire  reign  of  Bonaparte,  upon  one  of  those  occasions  in  which 
he  affected  to  take  the  sense  of  the  French  people  as  to  his  being  made 
consul  for  life,  or  emperor,  an  order  was  sent  to  the  French  armies  to  col- 
lect their  suffrages.  They  were  told  in  a  public  proclamation ,  that  they 
were  authorized  and  requested  to  vote  freely,  according  to  the  dictates  of 
their  best  judgments,  and  their  honest  convictions.  But  a  mandate  was 
privately  circulated  among  them,  importing  that  if  any  soldier  voted 
against  Bonaparte,  he  should  be  instantly  shot. 

Is  there  any  other  difference,  except  in  the  mode  of  punishment,  between 
that  case  and  the  arbitrary  removal  of  men  from  their  public  stations,  for 
no  other  reason,  than  that  of  an  honest  and  conscientious  preference  of 
one  presidential  candidate  to  another  ?  And  can  it  be  doubted,  that  the 
spirit  which  prompts  these  removals  is  restrained  from  being  extended  to 
all,  in  private  life,  who  manifested  a  similar  preference,  only  by  barriers 
which  it  dare  not  yet  break  down  ?  But  should  public  opinion  sanction 
them,  how  long  will  these  barriers  remain  ? 

One  of  the  worst  consequences  of  the  introduction  of  this  tenure  of 
public  office  will  be,  should  it  be  permanently  adopted,  to  substitute  for  a 
system  of  responsibility,  founded  upon  the  ability  and  integrity  with  which 
public  officers  discharge  their  duties  to  the  community,  a  system  of  uni- 
versal rapacity.  Incumbents,  feeling  the  instability  of  their  situations,  and 
knowing  their  liability  to  periodical  removals,  at  short  terms,  without  any 
regard  to  the  manner  in  which  they  have  executed  their  trusts,  will  be  dis- 
posed to  make  the  most  of  their  uncertain  offices  while  they  hold  them. 
And  hence  we  may  expect  innumerable  cases  of  fraud,  peculation,  and 
corruption. 

President  Jackson  commenced  his  official  career  on  the  4th  of  March 
last,  with  every  motive  which  should  operate  on  the  human  heart  to  urge 
him  to  forget  the  prejudices  and  passions  which  had  been  exhibited  in  the 
previous  contest,  and  to  practice  dignified  moderation  and  forbearance. 
He  had  been  the  choice  of  a  considerable  majority  of  the  people,  and  was 
elected  by  a  large  majority  of  the  electoral  votes.  He  had  been  elected 
mainly  from  the  all-powerful  influence  of  gratitude  for  his  brilliant  military 
services,  in  spite  of  uoubts  and  fears  entertained  by  many  who  contributed 
to  his  elevation.  He  was  far  advanced  in  years,  and  if  fame  speak  true, 
was  suffering  under  the  joint  infirmities  of  age  and  disease.     He  had  re- 


BEGINNING    OF    JACKSON'S    ADMINISTRATION.  377 

cently  been  visited  by  one  of  the  severest  afflictions  of  Providence,  in  the 
privation  of  the  partner  of  his  bosom,  whom  he  is  represented  to  have 
tenderly  loved,  and  who  warmly  returned  all  his  affection.  He  had  no 
child  on  whom  to  cast  his  honors.  Under  such  circumstances,  was  ever 
man  more  imperiously  called  upon  to  stifle  all  the  vindictive  passions  of 
his  nature,  to  quell  every  rebellious  feeling  of  his  heart,  and  to  dedicate 
the  short  residue  of  his  life  to  the  God  who  had  so  long  blessed  and  spared 
him,  and  to  the  country  which  had  so  greatly  honored  him  ? 

I  sincerely  hope  that  he  will  yet  do  this.  I  hope  so  for  the  sake  of  hu- 
man nature,  and  for  the  sake  of  his  own  reputation.  Whether  he  has, 
during  the  two  months  of  his  administration,  so  conducted  himself,  let 
facts  tell  and  history  pronounce.     Truth  is  mighty  and  will  prevail. 

It  was  objected  to  Mr.  Adams,  that  by  appointing  several  members  of 
Congress  to  public  places,  he  endangered  the  purity  of  the  body,  and  es- 
tablished a  precedent  fraught  with  the  most  dangerous  consequences.  And 
president  Jackson  (no,  he  begged  his  pardon,  it  was  candidate  Jackson), 
was  so  much  alarmed  by  these  appointments,  for  the  integrity  and  per- 
manency of  our  institutions,  that  in  a  solemn  communication  which  he 
made  to  the  Legislature  of  Tennessee,  he  declared  his  firm  conviction  to 
be,  that  no  member  of  Congress  ought  to  be  appointed  to  any  office  except 
a  seat  upon  the  bench.  And  he  added,  that  he  himself  would  conform  to 
that  rule. 

During  the  four  years  of  Mr.  Adams's  administration,  the  whole  number 
of  appointments  made  by  him  from  Congress,  did  not  exceed  four  or  five. 
In  the  first  four  weeks  of  that  of  his  successor,  more  than  double  that  num- 
ber have  been  appointed  by  him.  In  the  first  two  months  of  president 
Jackson's  administration,  he  has  appointed  more  members  of  Congress  to 
public  office,  than  I  believe  were  appointed  by  any  one  of  his  predecessors 
during  their  whole  period  of  four  or  eight  years.  And  it  appears,  that  no 
office  is  too  high  or  too  low  to  be  bestowed  by  him  on  this  favored  class, 
from  that  of  a  head  of  a  Department,  down  to  an  inconsiderable  collector- 
ship,  or  even  a  subordinate  office  under  a  collector.  If  I  have  not  been 
misinformed,  a  representative  from  the  greatest  commercial  metropolis  in 
the  United  States,  has  recently  been  appointed  to  some  inferior  station,  by 
the  collector  of  the  port  of  New  York. 

Without  meaning  to  assert  as  a  general  principle,  that  in  no  case  would 
it  be  proper  that  a  resort  should  be  had  to  the  halls  of  Congress,  to  draw 
from  them  tried  talents,  and  experienced  public  servants,  to  aid  in  the  ex- 
ecutive or  judicial  departments,  all  must  agree,  that  such  a  resort  should 
not  be  too  often  made,  and  that  there  should  be  some  limit  both  as  to  the 
number  and  the  nature  of  the  appointments.  And  I  do  sincerely  think, 
that  this  limit  has,  in  both  particulars,  been  transcended  beyond  all  safe 
bounds,  and  so  as  to  excite  serious  apprehensions. 

It  is  not,  however,  my  opinion,  but  that  of  president  Jackson,  which 
the  public  has  now  to  consider.     Having  declared  to  the  American  people 


378  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

through  the  Tennessee  Legislature,  the  danger  of  the  practice ;  having 
deliberately  committed  himself  to  act  in  consonance  with  that  declared 
opinion,  how  can  he  now  he  justified  in  violating  this  solemn  pledge,  and 
in  entailing  upou  his  country  a  perilous  precedeut,  fraught  with  the  cor- 
rupting tendency  which  he  described? 

It  is  vain  to  say,  that  the  Constitution,  as  it  now  stands,  does  not  forbid 
these  appointments.  It  does  not  enjoin  them.  If  there  be  an  inherent 
defect  in  the  theoretical  character  of  that  instrument,  president  Jackson 
was  bound  to  have  redeemed  his  pledge,  and  employed  the  whole  influence 
and  weight  of  his  name  to  remedy  the  defect  in  its  practical  operation. 
The  Constitution  admitted  of  the  service  of  one  man  in  the  presidential 
office,  during  his  life,  if  he  could  secure  successive  elections.  That  great 
reformer,  as  president  Jackson  describes  him,  whom  he  professes  to  imitate, 
did  not  wait  for  an  amendment  of  the  Constitution,  to  correct  that  defect ; 
but  after  the  example  of  the  father  of  his  country,  by  declining  to  serve 
longer  than  two  terms,  established  a  practical  principle  which  is  not  likely 
to  be  violated. 

There  was  another  class  of  citizens  upon  whom  public  offices  had  been 
showered  in  the  greatest  profusion.  I  do  not  know  the  number  of  editors 
of  newspapers  that  have  been  recently  appointed,  but  I  have  noticed  in  the 
public  prints,  some  fifteen  or  twenty.  And  they  were  generally  of  those 
whose  papers  had  manifested  the  greatest  activity  in  the  late  canvass,  the 
most  vulgar  abuse  of  opponents,  and  the  most  fulsome  praise  of  their 
favorite  candidate.  Editors  are  as  much  entitled  to  be  appointed  as  any 
other  class  of  the  community  ;  but  if  the  number  aud  the  quality  of  those 
promoted,  be  such  as  to  render  palpable  the  motive  of  their  appointment ; 
if  they  are  preferred,  not  on  account  of  their  fair  pretensions,  and  their 
ability  and  capacity  to  serve  the  public,  but  because  of  their  devotion  to  a 
particular  individual,  I  ask  if  the  necessary  consequence  must  not  be  to 
render  the  press  venal,  and  in  time  to  destroy  this  hitherto  justly  cherished 
palladium  of  our  liberty. 

If  the  principle  of  all  these  appointments,  this  monopoly  of  public  trusts 
by  members  of  Congress  and  particular  editors,  be  exceptionable  (and  I 
would  not  have  alluded  to  them  but  from  my  deliberate  conviction  that 
they  are  essentially  vicious),  their  effects  are  truly  alarming.  I  will  not 
impute  to  president  Jackson  any  design  to  subvert  our  liberties.  1  hope 
and  believe,  that  he  does  not  now  entertain  any  such  design.  But  I  must 
say,  that  if  an  ambitious  president  sought  the  overthrow  of  our  government, 
and  ultimately  to  establish  a  different  form,  he  would,  at  the  commence- 
ment of  his  administration,  proclaim  by  his  official  acts,  that  the  greatest 
public  virtue  was  ardent  devotion  to  him.  That  no  matter  what  had  been 
the  character,  the  services,  or  the  sacrifices  of  incumbents  or  applicants  for 
office,  what  their  experience  or  ability  to  serve  the  republic,  if  they  did  not 
bow  down  and  worship  him,  they  possessed  no  claim  to  his  patronage. 
Such  an  ambitious  president  would  say,  as  monarchs  have  said,  "  I  am  the 


BEGINNING    OF   JACKSON'S    ADMINISTRATION.  379 

State."  He  would  dismiss  all  from  public  employment  who  did  not  be- 
long to  the  true  faith.  He  would  stamp  upon  the  whole  official  corps  of 
government  one  homogeneous  character,  and  infuse  into  it  one  uniform 
principle  of  action.  He  would  scatter,  with  an  open  and  liberal  hand,  offi- 
ces among  the  members  of  Congress,  giving  the  best  to  those  who  had 
spoken,  and  written,  and  franked,  most  in  his  behalf.  He  would  subsidize 
the  press.  It  would  be  his  earnest  and  constant  aim  to  secure  the  two 
greatest  engines  of  operation  upon  public  opinion — Congress  and  the  press. 
He  would  promulgate  a  new  penal  code,  the  rewards  and  punishments  of 
which,  would  be  distributed  and  regulated  exclusively  by  devotion  or  op- 
position to  him.  And  when  all  this  powerful  machinery  was  put  in  opera- 
tion, if  he  did  not  succeed  in  subverting  the  liberties  of  his  country,  and  in 
establishing  himself  upon  a  throne,  it  would  be  because  some  new  means 
or  principle  of  resistance  had  been  discovered,  which  was  unknown  in  other 
times  or  to  other  republics. 

But  if  an  administration,  conducted  in  the  manner  just  proposed,  did 
not  aim  at  the  destruction  of  public  liberty,  it  would  engender  evils  of  a 
magnitude  so  great  as  gradually  to  alienate  the  affections  of  the  people 
from  their  government,  and  finally  lead  to  its  overthrow.  According  to 
the  principle  now  avowed  and  practiced,  all  offices,  vacant  and  filled, 
within  the  compass  of  the  Executive  power,  are  to  be  allotted  among  the 
partisans  of  the  successful  candidate.  The  people  and  the  service '  of  the 
State  are  to  be  put  aside,  and  every  thing  is  to  be  decided  by  the  zeal, 
activity,  and  attachment,  in  the  cause  of  a  particular  candidate,  which  were 
manifested  during  the  preceding  canvass.  The  consequence  of  these  prin- 
ciples would  be  to  convert  the  nation  into  one  perpetual  theater  for  polit- 
ical gladiators.  There  would  be  one  universal  scramble  for  the  public 
offices.  The  termination  of  one  presidential  contest  would  be  only  the 
signal  for  the  commencement  of  another.  And  on  the  conclusion  of  each 
we  should  behold  the  victor  distributing  the  prizes  and  applying  his  pun- 
ishments, like  a  military  commander,  immediately  after  he  had  won  a 
great  victory.  Congress  corrupted,  and  the  press  corrupted,  general  cor- 
ruption would  ensue,  until  the  substance  of  free  government  having  disap- 
peared, some  pretorian  band  would  arise,  and  with  the  general  concurrence 
of  a  distracted  people,  put  an  end  to  useless  forms. 

I  am  aware  that  the  late  acts  of  administration  on  which  it  has  been  my 
disagreeable  duty  to  animadvert  (I  hope  without  giving  pain  to  any  of  my 
fellow-citizens,  as  I  most  sincerely  wish  to  give  none),  were  sustained  upon 
some  vague  notion  or  purpose  of  reform.  And  it  was  remarkable  that 
among  the  loudest  trumpeters  of  reform  were  some  who  had  lately  re- 
ceived appointments  to  lucrative  offices.  Now  it  must  be  admitted  that, 
as  to  them,  a  most  substantial  and  valuable  reform  had  taken  place ;  but  I 
trust  that  something  more  extensively  beneficial  to  the  people  at  large  was 
intended  by  that  sweet-sounding  word.  I  know  that,  at  the  commence- 
ment, and  throughout  nearly  the  whole  progress  of  the  late  administration, 


380  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

a  reform  in  the  Constitution  was  talked  of,  so  as  to  exclude  from  public 
office  members  of  Congress,  during  the  periods  for  which  they  are  elected, 
and  a  limited  term  beyond  them.  The  proposition  appeared  to  be  received 
with  much  favor,  was  discussed  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  session 
after  session,  at  great  length,  and  with  unusual  eloquence  and  ability.  A 
majority  of  that  body  seemed  disposed  to  accede  to  it,  and  I  thought  for 
some  time  that  there  was  high  probability  of  its  passage,  at  least,  through 
that  House.  Its  great  champion  (General  Smyth,  of  Virginia),  pressed  it 
with  resolute  perseverance.  But  unfortunately,  at  the  last  session,  after  the 
decision  of  the  presidential  question,  it  was  manifest  that  the  kindness  with 
which  it  had  been  originally  received  had  greatly  abated.  Its  determined 
patron  found  it  extremely  difficult  to  engage  the  House  to  consider  it. 
When,  at  length,  he  prevailed  by  his  frequent  and  earnest  appeals  to  get  it 
taken  up,  new  views  appeared  to  have  suddenly  struck  the  reformists.  It 
was  no  longer  an  amendment  in  their  eyes,  so  indispensable  to  the  purity 
of  our  Constitution ;  and  the  majority  which  had  appeared  to  be  so  resolv- 
ed to  carry  it,  now,  by  a  direct  or  indirect  vote,  gave  it  the  go-by.  That 
majority,  I  believe,  was  composed  in  part  of  members  who,  after  the  4th 
of  March  last,  gave  the  best  practical  recantation  of  their  opinions,  by  ac- 
cepting from  the  new  president  lucrative  appointments,  in  direct  opposition 
to  the  principle  of  their  own  amendment.  And  now  General  Smyth  would 
find  it  even  more  impracticable  to  make  among  them  proselytes  to  his  con- 
servative alteration  in  the  Constitution,  than  he  did  to  gain  any  to  his  ex- 
position of  the  Apocalypse. 

Reform,  such  as  alone  could  interest  a  whole  people,  can  only  take  place 
in  the  Constitution,  or  laws,  or  policy  of  the  government.  Now  and  then, 
under  every  administration,  and  at  all  times,  a  faithless  or  incompetent 
officer  may  be  discovered  who  ought  to  be  displaced.  And  that  in  all  the 
departments  of  the  government.  But  I  presume  that  the  correction  of 
such  occasional  abuses  could  hardly  be  expected  to  fulfill  the  promise  of 
reform  which  had  been  so  solemnly  made.  I  would  then  ask,  what  was 
the  reform  intended  i  What  part  of  the  Constitution  was  to  be  altered  ? 
What  law  repealed  ?  What  branch  of  the  settled  policy  of  the  country  was 
to  be  changed  ?  The  people  have  a  right  to  know  what  great  blessing  was 
intended  by  their  rulers  for  them,  and  to  demand  some  tangible  practical 
good,  in  lieu  of  a  general,  vague,  and  undefined  assurance  of  reform. 

I  know  that  the  recent  removals  from  office  are  attempted  to  be  justified 
by  a  precedent  drawn  from  Mr.  Jefferson's  administration.  But  there  was 
not  the  most  distant  analogy  between  the  two  cases.  Several  years  prior 
to  his  election,  the  public  offices  of  the  country  had  been  almost  ex- 
clusively bestowed  upon  the  party  to  which  that  at  the  head  of  which  he 
stood  was  opposed.  When  he  commenced  his  administration  he  found  a 
complete  monopoly  of  them  in  the  hands  of  the  adverse  party.  He  dis- 
missed a  few  incumbents  for  the  purpose  of  introducing  in  their  places 
others  of  his  own  party,  and  thus  doing  equal  justice  to  both  sects.     But 


BEGINNING   OF   JACKSON^   ADMINISTRATION.  381 

the  number  of  removals  was  far  short  of  those  which  are  now  in  progress. 
When  president  Jackson  entered  on  his  administration  he  found  a  far  dif- 
ferent state  of  things.  There  had  been  no  previous  monopoly.  Public 
offices  were  alike  filled  by  his  friends  and  opponents  in  the  late  election* 
If  the  fact  could  be  ascertained,  I  believe  it  would  be  found  that  there  was 
a  larger  number  of  officers  under  the  government  attached  than  opposed 
to  his  late  election. 

Further,  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Jefferson's  election,  it  was  the  consequence 
of  the  people  having  determined  on  a  radical  change  of  system.  There 
was  a  general  belief  among  the  majority  who  brought  about  that  event, 
that  their  opponents  had  violated  the  Constitution  in  the  enactment  of  the 
alien  and  sedition  laws  ;  that  they  had  committed  other  great  abuses,  and 
that  some  of  them  contemplated  an  entire  change  in  the  character  of  our 
government,  so  as  to  give  it  a  monarchical  cast.  I  state  the  historical  fact, 
without  intending  to  revive  the  discussion,  or  deeming  it  necessary  to 
examine  whether  such  a  design  existed  or  not.  But  those  who  at  that 
day  did  believe  it,  could  hardly  be  expected  to  acquiesce  in  the  possession 
by  their  opponents,  the  minority  of  the  nation,  of  all  the  offices  of  a  gov- 
ernment to  which  some  of  them  were  believed  to  be  hostile  in  principle. 
The  object  of  Mr.  Jefferson  was  to  break  down  a  pre-existing  monopoly  in 
the  hands  of  one  party,  and  to  establish  an  equilibrium  between  the  two 
great  parties.  The  object  of  president  Jackson  appears  to  be,  to  destroy 
an  existing  equilibrium  between  the  two  parties  to  the  late  contest,  and 
to  establish  a  monopoly.  The  object  of  president  Jefferson,  -was  the 
republic,  and  not  himself.  That  of  president  Jackson  is  himself,  and  not 
the  State. 

It  never  was  advanced  under  Mr.  Jefferson's  administration,  that  devotion 
and  attachment  to  him  were  an  indispensable  qualification,  without  which 
no  one  could  hold  or  be  appointed  to  office.  The  contrast  between  the 
inaugural  speech  of  that  great  man,  and  that  of  his  present  successor,  was 
remarkable  in  every  respect.  Mr.  Jefferson's  breathed  a  spirit  of  peace. 
It  breathed  a  spirit  of  calm  philosophy  and  dignified  moderation.  It 
treated  the  nation  as  one  family.  "  We  are  all  republicans,  all  federalists." 
It  contained  no  denunciations ;  no  mysterious  or  ambiguous  language  ;  no 
reflections  upoii^  the  conduct  of  his  great  rival  and  immediate  predecessor. 
What  is  the  character  of  the  inaugural  speech  of  the  present  chief  magis- 
trate, I  shall  not  attempt  to  sketch.  Mr.  Jefferson,  upon  the  solemn  oc- 
casion of  his  installation  into  office,  laid  down  his  rule  for  appointment  to 
office — "  Is  he  honest  ?  is  he  capable  ?  is  he  faithful  to  the  Constitution  ?" 
But  capacity,  and  integrity,  and  fidelity,  according  to  the  modern  rule,  ap- 
pear to  count  for  nothing,  without  the  all-absorbing  virtue  of  fidelity  to 
president  Jackson. 

I  will  not  consume  the  time  of  my  friends  and  fellow-citizens  with  ob- 
servations upon  many  of  the  late  chauges. 

My  object  has  been,  to  point  your  attention  to  the  principle  which  ap- 


382  SPEECHES    OF    HENEY    CLAY. 

pears  to  have  governed  all  of  them,  and  to  classes.  I  would  not  have 
touched  this  unpleasant  topic,  but  that  it  seems  to  me  to  furnish  much 
and  just  occasion  for  serious  alarm.  I  hope  that  I  have  treated  it  in  a 
manner  becoming  me,  without  incurring  the  displeasure  of  any  one  now 
present.  I  believe  the  times  require  all  the  calm  heads  and  sound  hearts 
of  the  country.  And  I  would  not  intentionally  say  one  word  to  excite  the 
passions. 

But  there  are  a  few  cases  of  recent  removal  of  such  flagrant  impropriety, 
as  I  sincerely  think,  that  I  can  not  forbear  alluding  to  them.  Under  no 
administration  prior  to  the  present,  from  the  commencement  of  the  gov- 
ernment, have  our  diplomatic  representatives  been  recalled  from  abroad,  on 
account  of  the  political  opinions  they  entertained  in  regard  to  a  previous 
presidential  election.  Within  my  recollection,  at  this  time,  there  has  been 
but  one  instance  of  recall  of  a  foreign  minister  under  the  present  Consti- 
tution, on  account  of  any  dissatisfaction  with  him.  But  president  Wash- 
ington did  not  recall  Colonel  Monroe  (the  case  referred  to)  from  France, 
on  his  individual  account,  but  because  he  was  not  satisfied  with  the  manner 
in  which  he  performed  the  duties  of  the  mission.  President  Jackson  has 
ordered  home  two  of  our  foreign  ministers,  one  filling  the  most  important 
European  mission,  and  the  other  the  most  important  of  our  missions  on 
this  continent.  In  both  cases  the  sole  ground  of  recall  is,  that  they  were 
opposed  to  his  election  as  president.  And  as  if  there  should  be  no  pos- 
sible controversy  on  this  head,  one  of  them  wras  recalled  before  it  was 
known  at  Washington  that  he  had  reached  Bogota,  the  place  of  his  desti- 
nation ;  and  consequently  before  he  could  have  possibly  disobeyed  any  in- 
struction, or  violated  any  duty. 

The  pecuniary  effect  of  these  changes,  is  the  certain  expenditure,  in 
outfits,  of  eighteen  thousand  dollars,  and  perhaps  more  than  triple  that 
sum  in  contingences.  Now  it  does  seem  to  me,  that  (and  I  put  it  to  your 
candid  judgments  whether)  this  is  too  large  a  sum  for  the  public  to  pay, 
because  two  gentlemen  had  made  a  mistake  of  the  name  which  they  should 
have  written  on  a  little  bit  of  paper  thrown  into  the  ballot-boxes.  Mis- 
take !  They  had,  in  fact,  made  no  practical  mistake.  They  had  not  voted 
at  all,  one  being  out  of  the  United  States,  and  the  other  out  of  his  own 
State  at  the  time  of  the  election.  The  money  is  therefore  to  be  paid  be- 
cause they  made  a  mistake  in  the  abstract  opinions  which  they  held,  and 
might  possibly,  if  they  had  been  at  home,  have  erroneously  inscribed  one 
name  instead  of  another  on  their  ballots. 

There  would  be  some  consolation  for  this  waste  of  public  treasure,  if  it 
were  compensated  by  the  superiority  of  qualification  on  the  part  of  the 
late  appointments,  in  comparison  with  the  im'evious.  But  I  know  all  four 
of  the  gentlemen  perfectly  well,  and  my  firm  conviction  is,  that  in  neither 
change  has  the  public  gained  any  intellectual  advantage.  In  one  of  them, 
indeed,  the  victor  of  Tippecanoe  and  the  Thames,  of  whose  gallantry  many 
who  are  now  here  were  witnesses,  is  replaced  by  a  gentleman  who,  if  he 


BEGINNING    OF    JACKSON'S    ADMINISTRATION.  383 

possesses  one  single  attainment  to  qualify  him  for  the  office,  I  solemnly 
declare  it  lias  escaped  my  discernment. 

There  was  another  class  of  persons  whose  expulsion  from  office  was 
marked  by  peculiar  hardship  and  injustice.  Citizens  of  the  District  of 
Columbia  were  deprived  of  all  actual  participation  in  the  elections  of  the 
United  States.  They  are  debarred  from  voting  for  a  president,  or  any 
member  of  Congress.  Their  sentiments,  therefore,  in  relation  to  any  elec- 
tion of  those  officers,  are  perfectly  abstract.  To  punish  them,  as  in  nu- 
merous instances  has  been  done,  by  dismissing  them  from  their  employ- 
ments, not  for  what  they  did,  but  for  what  they  thought,  is  a  cruel  ag- 
gravation of  their  anomalous  condition.  I  know  well  those  who  have  been 
discharged  from  the  Department  of  State,  and  I  take  great  pleasure  in 
bearing  testimony  to  their  merits.  Some  of  them  would  have  done  honor 
to  any  bureau  in  any  country. 

We  may  worship  God  according  to  the  dictates  of  our  own  consciences. 
No  man's  right,  in  that  respect,  can  be  called  in  question.  The  Consti- 
tution secures  it.  Public  offices  are  happily,  according  to  the  theory 
of  our  Constitution,  alike  accessible  to  all,  Protestants  and  Catholics, . 
and  to  every  denomination  of  each.  But  if  our  homage  is  not  paid  to 
a  mortal,  wre  are  liable  to  a  punishment  which  an  erroneous  worship  of 
God  does  not  bring  upon  us.  Those  public  officers,  it  seems,  who  have 
failed  to  exhibit  their  devotion  to  that  mortal,  are  to  be  visited  by  all  the 
punishment  which  he  can  inflict,  in  virtue  of  laws,  the  execution  of  which 
was  committed  to  his  hands  for  the  public  good,  and  not  to  subserve  his 
private  purposes. 

At  the  most  important  port  of  the  United  States,  the  office  of  collector 
was  filled  by  Mr.  Thompson,  whose  removal  was  often  urged  upon  the  late 
administration  by  some  of  its  friends,  upon  the  ground  of  his  alleged  at- 
tachment to  General  Jackson.  But  the  late  president  was  immovable  in 
his  resolution  to  deprive  no  man  of  his  office,  in  consequence  of  his  po- 
litical opinions  or  preferences.  Mr.  Thompson's  removal  was  so  often  and 
so  strongly  pressed,  for  the  reason  just  stated,  that  an  inquiry  was  made 
of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  into  the  manner  in  which  the  duties  of 
the  office  were  discharged.  The  secretary  stated  that  there  was  no  better 
collector  in  the  public  service  ;  and  that  his  returns  and  accounts  were 
regularly  and  neatly  rendered,  and  all  the  duties  of  his  office  ably  and 
honestly  performed,  as  he  knew  or  believed.  This  meritorious  officer  has 
been  removed  to  provide  a  place  for  Mr.  Swartwout,  whose  association 
with  Colonel  Burr  is  notorious  throughout  the  United  States.  I  put  it  to 
the  candor  of  all  who  are  here,  to  say  if  such  a  change  can  be  justified 
in  the  port  of  New  York,  the  revenue  collected  at  which  amounts  to  about 
ten  millions  of  dollars,  or  more  than  one  third  of  the  whole  revenue  of  the 
United  States. 

I  will  detain  the  present  assembly  no  longer  upon  subjects  connected 
with  the  general  government.     I  hope   that  I  shall  find,  in  the   future 


384  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

course  of  the  new  administration,  less  cause  for  public  disapprobation.  I 
most  anxiously  Lope,  that  when  its  measures  come  to  be  developed,  at 
the  next  and  succeeding  sessions  of  Congress,  they  shall  be  perceived  to 
be  such  as  are  best  adapted  to  promote  the  prosperity  of  the  country.  I 
will  say,  with  entire  sincerity,  that  I  shall  be  most  happy  to  see  it  sus- 
taining the  American  system,  including  internal  improvements,  and  up- 
holding the  established  policy  of  the  government  at  home  and  abroad. 
And  I  shall  ever  be  as  ready  to  render  praise  where  praise  is  due,  as  it 
is  now  painful  to  me,  under  existing  circumstauces,  to  participate  in  the 
disapprobation  which  recent  occurrences  have  produced. 

No  occasion  can  be  more  appropriate  than  the  present,  when  surrounded 
by  my  former  constituents,  to  say  a  few  words  upon  the  unimportant  sub- 
ject of  myself.  Prior  to  my  return  home  I  had  stated,  in  auswer  to  all 
inquiries  whether  I  should  be  again  presented  as  a  candidate  to  represent 
my  old  district  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  that  I  should  come  to  no 
absolute  decision,  until  I  had  taken  time  for  reflection,  and  to  ascertain 
what  might  be  the  feelings  and  wishes  of  those  who  had  so  often  honored 
me  with  their  suffrages.  The  present  representative  of  the  district  has 
conducted  himself  toward  me  with  the  greatest  liberality,  and  I  take  pleas- 
ure now  in  making  my  public  acknowledgments,  so  justly  due  to  him. 
He  had  promptly  declined  being  a  candidate,  if  I  would  offer,  and  he 
warmly  urged  me  to  offer. 

Since  my  return  home,  I  have  mixed  freely  as  I  could  with  my  friends 
and  fellow-citizens  of  the  district.  They  have  met  me  with  the  greatest 
cordiality.  Many  of  them  have  expressed  a  wish  that  I  would  again 
represent  them.  Some  of  the  most  prominent  and  respectable  of  those 
who  voted  for  the  present  chief  magistrate,  have  also  expressed  a  sim- 
ilar wish.  I  have  every  reason  to  believe,  that  there  would  be  no  oppo- 
sition to  me,  from  any  quarter  or  any  party,  if  I  were  to  offer.  But  if  I 
am  not  greatly  deceived  in  the  prevailing  feeling  throughout  the  district, 
it  is  one  more  delicate  and  respectful  toward  me,  and  I  appreciate  it  much 
higher,  than  if  it  had  been  manifested  in  loud  calls  upon  me  to  return  to 
my  old  post.  It  referred  the  question  to  my  own  sober  judgment.  My 
former  constituents  were  generally  ready  to  acquiesce  in  any  decision  I 
might  think  proper  to  make.  If  I  were  to  offer  for  Congress,  they  were 
prepared  to  support  me  with  their  accustomed  zeal  and  true-heartedness. 
I  thank  them  all,  from  the  very  bottom  of  my  heart,  whether  they  agreed 
or  differed  with  me  in  the  late  contest,  for  this  generous  confidence. 

I  have  deliberated  much  on  the  question.  My  friends,  in  other  parts  of 
the  Union,  are  divided  in  opinion  about  the  utility  of  any  services  which  I 
could  render,  at  the  present  period,  in  the  national  Legislature.  This  state 
of  things,  at  home  and  abroad,  left  me  free  to  follow  the  impulse  of  my 
own  feelings,  and  the  dictates  of  my  own  judgment.  These  prompted  me 
to  remain  in  private  life.  In  coming  to  this  resolution,  I  did  not  mean  to 
impair  the  force  of  the  obligation  under  which  every  citizen,  in  my  opin 


BEGINNING   OF   JACKSON'S    ADMINISTRATION.  385 

ion,  stood,  to  the  last  flickering  of  human  life,  to  dedicate  his  best  exertions 
to  the  service  of  the  republic.  I  am  ready  to  act  in  conformity  with  that 
obligation,  whenever  it  shall  be  the  pleasure  of  the  people;  and  such  a 
probability  of  usefulness  shall  exist  as  will  justify  my  acceptance  of  any 
service  which  they  may  choose  to  designate. 

I  have  served  my  country  now  near  thirty  years.  My  constitution,  never 
very  vigorous,  requires  repose.  My  health,  always  of  late  years  very  deli- 
cate, demands  care.  My  private  affairs  want  my  attention.  Upon  my 
return  home,  I  found  my  house  out  of  repair;  my  farm  not  in  order,  the 
fences  down,  the  stock  poor,  the  crop  not  set,  and  late  in  April  the  corn- 
stalks of  the  year's  growth  yet  standing  in  the  field — a  sure  sign  of  slovenly 
cultivation. 

Under  all  circumstances,  I  think  that,  without  being  liable  to  the  reproach 
of  dereliction  of  any  public  duty  to  my  country  or  to  my  friends,  I  may 
continue  at  home  for  a  season,  if  not  during  the  remainder  of  my  life, 
among  my  friends  and  old  constituents,  cheering  and  cheered  by  them, 
and  interchanging  all  the  kind  and  friendly  offices  incident  to  private  life. 
I  wished  to  see  them  all ;  to  shake  hands  cordially  with  them ;  to  inquire 
into  the  deaths,  births,  marriages,  and  other  interesting  events  among 
them ;  to  identify  myself  in  fact,  as  I  am  in  feeling,  with  them,  and  with 
the  generation  which  has  sprung  up  while  I  have  been  from  home,  serving 
them.  I  wish  to  put  my  private  affairs  to  rights,  and  if  I  can,  with  the 
blessing  of  Providence,  to  re-establish  a  shattered  constitution  and  enfeebled 
health. 

It  has  been  proposed  to  me  to  offer  for  a  seat  in  the  Legislature  of  the 
State.  I  should  be  proud  of  the  selection,  if  I  believed  I  could  be  useful 
at  Frankfort.  I  see,  I  think,  very  clearly,  the  wants  of  Kentucky.  Its 
finances  are  out  of  order,  but  they  could  be  easily  put  straight,  by  a  little 
moral  courage,  on  the  part  of  the  General  Assembly,  and  a  small  portion 
of  candor  and  good  will  among  the  people.  Above  all,  we  want  an  efficient 
system  of  internal  improvements  adopted  by  the  State.  No  Kentuckian 
who  traveled  in  or  out  of  it,  could  behold  the  wretched  condition  of  our 
roads  without  the  deepest  mortification.  We  are  greatly  in  the  rear  of 
almost  all  the  adjacent  States,  some  of  which  sprung  into  existence  long 
after  we  were  an  established  commonwealth.  While  they  are  obeying  the 
spirit  of  the  age,  and  nobly  marching  forward  in  the  improvement  of  their 
respective  territories,  we  are  absolutely  standing  still,  or  rather  going  back- 
ward. It  is  scarcely  credible,  but  nevertheless  true,  that  it  took  my  family, 
in  the  month  of  April,  nearly  four  days  to  travel  through  mud  and  mire,  a 
distance  of  ouly  sixty-four  miles,  over  one  of  the  most  frequented  roads  in 
the  State. 

And  yet  our  wants,  on  the  subject,  are  perfectly  within  the  compass  of 
our  means,  judiciously  applied.  An  artificial  road  from  Maysville  to  the 
Tennessee  line,  one  branch  in  the  direction  of  Nashville,  and  a  second  to 
strike  the  mouth  of  Cumberland  or  Tennessee  river ;  an  artificial  road  ex- 

25 


386  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY   CLAY. 

tending  from  Louisville  to  intersect  the  other,  somewhere  about  Bowling 
Green ;  one  passing  by  Shelbyville  and  Frankfort,  to  the  Cumberland  gap ; 
and  an  artificial  road  extending  from  Frankfort  to  the  mouth  of  Big  Sandy ; 
compose  all  the  leading  roads  which  at  present  need  the  resources  of  the 
State.  These  might  be  constructed,  partly  upon  the  Mc Adams  method, 
and  partly  by  simply  graduating  and  bridging  them,  which  latter  mode 
can  be  performed  at  an  expense  •  less  than  one  thousand  dollars  per  mile. 
Other  laterals  connecting  these  main  roads,  might  be  left  to  the  public  spirit 
of  the  local  authorities  and  of  private  companies. 

Congress,  without  doubt,  would  aid  the  State,  if  we  did  not  call  upon 
Hercules  Avithout  putting  our  shoulders  to  the  wheel.  But  without  that 
aid  we  could  ourselves  accomplish  all  the  works  which  I  have  described. 
It  would  not  be  practicable  to  complete  them  in  a  period  of  less  than  seven 
or  eight  years,  and  of  course  not  necessary  to  raise  the  whole  sum  requisite 
to  the  object  in  one  year.  Funds  drawn  from  executed  parts  of  the  system 
might  be  applied  to  the  completion  of  those  that  remained.  This  auxiliary 
source,  combined  with  the  ample  means  of  the  State,  properly  developed, 
and  faithfully  appropriated,  would  enable  us  to  construct  all  the  roads 
which  I  have  sketched  without  burdening  the  people. 

But,  solicitous  as  I  feel  on  this  interesting  subject,  I  regret  that  I  have 
not  yet  seen  sufficient  demonstrations  of  the  public  will  to  assure  me  that 
the  judgment  of  the  people  had  carried  them  to  the  same  or  similar  con- 
clusions to  which  my  miud  has  conducted  me.  We  have  been,  for  years 
past,  unhappily  greatly  distracted  and  divided.  These  dissensious  have 
drawn  us  off  from  a  view  of  greater  to  less  important  concerns.  They  have 
excited  bitter  feelings  and  animosities,  and  created  strong  prejudices  and 
jealousies.  I  fear  that  from  these  causes  the  public  is  not  yet  prepared 
dispassionately  to  consider  and  adopt  a  comprehensive,  I  think  the  only 
practical,  system  of  internal  improvements  in  this  State.  A  premature 
effort  might  retard,  instead  of  accelerating,  the  object.  And  I  must  add, 
that  I  fear  extraneous  causes  would  bias  and  influence  the  judgment  of  the 
Legislature. 

Upon  the  whole,  I  must  decline  acceding  to  the  wishes  of  those  who 
desired  to  see  me  in  the  Legislature.  Retirement,  unqualified  retirement, 
from  all  public  employment,  is  what  I  unaffectedly  desire.  I  would  here- 
after, if  my  life  and  health  are  preserved,  be  ready  at  all  times  to  act  on 
the  principles  I  have  avowed,  and  whenever,  at  a  more  auspicious  period, 
there  shall  appear  to  be  a  probability  of  my  usefulness  to  the  Union  or  to 
the  State,  I  will  promptly  obey  any  call  which  the  people  may  be  pleased 
to  make. 

And  now,  my  friends  and  fellow-citizens,  I  can  not  part  from  you,  on 
possibly  this  last  occasion  of  my  ever  publicly  addressing  you,  without 
reiterating  the  expression  of  my  thanks  from  a  heart  overflowing  with 
gratitude.  I  came  among  you,  now  more  than  thirty  years  ago,  an  or- 
phan boy,  penniless,  a  stranger  to  you  all,  without  friends,  without  the  favor 


BEGINNING   OF   JACKSON'S    ADMINISTRATION.  387 

of  the  great.  You  took  me  up,  cherished  me,  caressed  me,  protected  me, 
honored  me.  You  have  constantly  poured  upon  me  a  hold  and  unabated 
stream  of  innumerable  favors.  Time,  which  wears  out  every  thing,  has  in- 
creased and  strengthened  your  affection  for  me.  When  I  seem  deserted  by 
almost  the  whole  world,  and  assailed  by  almost  every  tongue,  and  pen,  and 
press,  you  have  fearlessly  and  manfully  stood  by  me,  with  unsurpassed  zeal 
and  undiminished  friendship.  When  I  felt  as  if  I  should  sink  beneath  the 
storm  of  abuse  and  detraction,  which  was  violently  raging  around  me,  I 
have  found  myself  upheld  and  sustained  by  your  encouraging  voices,  and 
your  approving  smiles.  I  have  doubtless  committed  many  faults  and  in- 
discretions, over  which  you  have  thrown  the  broad  mantle  of  your  charity. 
But  I  can  say,  and  in  the  presence  of  my  God  and  of  this  assembled  mul- 
titude, I  will  say,  that  I  have  honestly  and  faithfully  served  my  country  ; 
that  I  have  never  wronged  it ;  and  that,  however  unprepared  I  lament  that 
I  am  to  appear  in  the  divine  presence  on  other  accounts,  I  invoke  the  stern 
justice  of  His  judgment  on  my  public  conduct,  without  the  smallest  appre 
hension  of  His  displeasure. 

Mr.  Clay  concluded  by  proposing  the  following  toast : 

The  State  of  Kentucky  :  a  cordial  union  of  all  parties  in  favor  of  an  effi- 
cient system  of  internal  improvements,  adapted  to  the  wants  of  the  State. 


EFFECT  OF  THE  PROTECTIVE  SYSTEM  ON  THE 
STAPLES  OF  THE  SOUTH, 

NATCHEZ,  MARCH  13,  1830. 

[Mr.  Clay,  still  in  private  life,  on  returning  from  New  Or- 
leans, in  the  spring  of  1830,  was  entertained  by  a  public  dinner 
at  Natchez,  at  the  date  above  given,  the  Hon.  Edward  Turner, 
Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Mississippi,  presiding,  who, 
after  a  complimentary  speech  in  honor  of  Mr.  Clay,  read  the 
following  toast  : 

"  Our  distinguished  guest — the  firm  and  patriotic  statesman;  the  grandeur 
and  usefulness  of  his  political  views  can  only  be  surpassed  by  his  eloquence  and 
ability  in  advocating  them." 

To  which  Mr.  Clay  replied  in  substance*  as  follows  :] 

Mr.  President  and  Fellow-Citizens — I  not  only  rise  in  gratitude  for 
the  favorable  opinions  you  entertain  of  me,  but  to  avail  myself  of  an  op- 
portunity to  acknowledge  my  sense  of  the  honors  conferred  upon  me  by 
my  fellow-citizens  of  Mississippi.  I  did,  indeed,  expect  to  receive  from 
them  such  kind  attentions,  as  they  are  celebrated  for  extending  to  every 
stranger  having  had  the  satisfaction  to  visit  them  ;  but  it  is  ray  pride  to 
acknowledge,  that  those  paid  to  me,  have  far,  very  far,  exceeded  my  expect- 
ations ;  to  have  received  and  not  acknowledge  how  sensible  I  am  of  them, 
would  seem  an  affectation  of  concealing  feelings,  which  I  ought  to  rejoice 
in  possessing,  and  which  justice  to  myself,  as  well  as  to  those  who  bestow 
this  kindness,  requires  of  me  to  avow. 

Ere  I  landed  on  your  shores,  your  welcome  and  congratulations  came  to 
meet  me ;  and  they  came  too  the  more  welcome,  because  I  saw  comming- 
ling around  me,  citizens,  who,  though  at  variance  on  political  subjects,  do 
not  suffer  their  differences  to  interfere  with  the  claims,  which,  as  friends 
and  as  countrymen,  they  have  on  each  other ;  and  if  I  have  done  aught 
deserving  their  approbation  as  well  as  their  censure,  believe  me,  in  all  that 
I  have  done,  I  have  acted  in  view  of  the  interest  and  happiness  of  our 
common  country. 

*  It  should  be  observed  that  this  speech  is  only  a  condensed  statement  from  a 
Natchez  paper 


EFFECT  OF  THE  PROTECTIVE  SYSTEM  ON  THE  SOUTH.   389 

There  is  nothing  in  life  half  so  delightful  to  the  heart,  as  to  know,  that, 
notwithstanding  all  the  conflicts  that  arise  among  men,  yet  there  comes  a 
time  when  their  passions  and  prejudices  shall  slumber,  and  that  the  stran- 
ger guest  shall  be  cheered  in  seeing,  that  whatever  differences  may  arise 
among  them,  yet  there  are  moments  when  they  shall  cease  from  troubling, 
and  when  all  that  is  turbulent  and  distrustful  among  them,  shall  be  sacri- 
ficed to  the  generous  and  social  dictates  of  their  nature  ;  and  it  would  be 
to  me  a  source  of  great  satisfaction  to  think,  that  a  recollection  of  the 
present  would  act  as  a  mediator,  and  soften  the  asperities  of  your  divisions, 
as  circumstances  and  events  may  renew  them. 

The  gentleman  who  sits  at  the  head  of  this  festive  board,  and  near  whose 
person  your  kind  consideration  and  courtesy  has  placed  me,  Avas  the  com- 
panion of  my  early  days ;  and  neither  time  nor  distance  have  weakened 
in  him  the  feelings  which  began  with  our  youth,  the  strong  aud  bright  evi- 
dences of  which  are  shown  in  the  narration  he  has  given  of  my  public  serv- 
ices. But  I  fear  that  he  has  rather  conceived  me  to  be  what  his  wishes 
would  have  me  ;  and  that  to  these,  more  than  to  my  own  deservings,  must  I 
attribute  his  flattering  notice  of  me. 

He  then  adverted  to  that  part  of  Judge  Turner's  address  which  spoke 
of  Mr.  Clay  as  the  decided  advocate  of  the  late  war.  We  can  not  attempt 
to  draw  even  the  outlines  of  his  observations,  or  to  portray  the  feelings  he 
discovered  while  depicting  the  part  which  Kentucky  acted  in  the  war ;  of 
the  volunteers  she  sent  forth  to  battle,  of  the  privations  she  suffered,  of 
the  money  expended,  and  of  the  blood  that  flowed  from  her  sons,  in  sup- 
porting the  nation  in  the  defense  of  her  rights  and  independence.  The 
expression  of  his  eye,  his  attitude,  and  gestures,  evinced  how  deeply  the 
subject  affected  him.  The  people  of  Kentucky,  he  said,  acted  nobly 
throughout  the  whole  contest ;  and  whether  in  defeat  or  in  victory,  she 
still  showed  the  determination  to  sustain  the  American  character,  and  to 
maintain  American  independence ;  and  it  would  be  only  to  repeat,  what  was 
a  common  observation  among  the  people  of  his  State,  to  say,  that  their 
countrymen  of  Mississippi,  acted  with  a  spirit  during  the  war  worthy  the 
best  days  of  the  Revolution. 

In  speaking  of  the  invasion  of  Louisiana,  and  of  the  battle  of  New 
Orleans,  his  feeling  and  his  voice  seemed  to  rise  with  the  subject.  The 
encomiums  he  passed  upon  the  hero  who  had  achieved  the  victory,  though 
said  in  a  few  words,  were  such  as  might  be  expected  from  a  statesman  so 
great  in  honor,  and  so  exalted  in  patriotism,  as  Mr.  Clay.  He  concluded 
this  part  of  his  speech,  by  saying,  that,  although  by  the  negotiations  at 
Ghent,  none  of  the  objects  for  which  the  nation  went  to  war,  were  guaran- 
tied by  the  treaty  of  peace ;  yet  they  were  secured  to  us  by  a  power  much 
stronger  than  any  treaty  stipulations  could  give  :  the  influence  of  our  arms, 
the  resources  and  power  of  the  republic,  as  brought  forth  and  shown  in 
the  contest. 

He  now  spoke  of  the  apprehensions  entertained  by  many,  that  the  Union 


390  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

would  be  dissolved ;  but  he  considered  all  apprehensions  of  this  kind,  as 
arising  more  from  our  fears  that  such  a  misfortune  sbould  visit  the  coun- 
try, than  from  any  substantial  reasons  to  justify  them.  Rumors,  lie  said, 
had  gone  abroad  ever  since  the  adoption  of  the  present  Constitution,  tbat 
tbe  republic  would  be  dismembered.  Whenever  any  important  question 
arose,  in  wbich  the  passions  and  prejudices  of  party,  rather  than  the  rea- 
son of  the  people,  was  brought  to  bear  on  the  discussion,  tbe  cry  would 
be  heard,  that  tbe  Union  would  fall  in  the  conflict ;  to-day,  the  disposition 
to  separate  would  be  charged  on  the  "West  ;  to-morrow,  against  the  North 
or  tbe  East;  and  then  it  would  be  returned  back  again  to  the  South  ;  but 
as  long  as  I  have  lived,  said  Mr.  Clay,  I  have  seen  nothing  to  give  me  any 
serious  fears  that  such  an  evil  could  befall  us.  First,  the  people  were 
divided  into  democrats  and  federalists  ;  then  we  had  the  funding  system, 
and  the  bank  of  the  United  States  ;  then  came  the  Missouri  question,  and 
last  the  tariff.  On  this  question  my  partial  friend  has  honored  me  with 
the  appellation  of  the  advocate  of  domestic  industry.  I  am,  indeed,  from 
conscientious  convictions,  the  friend  of  that  system  of  public  policy,  which 
has  been  called  the  American  system  ;  and  here,  among  those  who  honestly 
differ  with  me  on  this  question,  I  would  be  indulged,  by  this  magnanimous 
people,  in  offering  a  few  remarks  on  this  subject. 

It  has  been  objected  to  this  policy  by  a  distinguished  statesman  in  Con- 
gress, that  our  country  was  too  extended,  the  lands  too  cheap  and  fertile, 
and  our  population  too  sparse  to  admit  of  the  manufacturing  system  ;  that 
our  people  were  physically  incapable  of  that  confined  degree  of  labor,  nec- 
essary to  excellence  in  manufactures  ;  but  experience  has  surely  disproved 
these  positions.  We  are  by  nature  inferior  to  no  people,  physically  or 
mentally,  and  time  has  proved,  and  will  continue  to  prove  it. 

I  am  aware  that  the  people  of  this  quarter  of  the  Union  conscientiously 
believe,  that  the  tariff  bears  heavily  on  them ;  yet  I  feel  also  well  assured, 
from  a  retrospect  of  the  past,  that  if  the  laws  on  this  subject  were  even 
more  severe  in  their  operation  than  I  believe  them  to  be,  this  patriotic 
people  would  endure  them  patiently.  Yes,  if  the  independence  of  the 
country,  the  interests,  and  above  all,  the  cause  of  the  Union  required  heavy 
sacrifices,  they  would  endure  them.  But  while  claiming  no  immunity 
from  error,  I  feel  the  most  sincere,  the  deepest  conviction,  that  the  tariff, 
so  far  from  having  proved  injurious  to  tbe  peculiar  interests  of  this  section 
of  the  country,  has  been  eminently  beneficial.  I  ask  leave  to  put  two  ques- 
tions to  those  interested  in  your  great  staple.  I  would  take  the  common 
operations  of  sale  and  of  purchase:  has  the  operation  of  the  tariff  lowered 
the  price  of  what  you  sell  ?  The  price  of  every  article  must  be  regulated 
mainly  by  the  demand:  has,  then,  the  consumption  of  cotton  diminished 
since  the  tariff  of  1824,  or  1828  ?  No,  it  has  increased,  greatly  increased ; 
and  why  ?  Because  the  protection  extended  by  this  policy,  has  created  a 
new  customer  in  the  American  manufacturer,  who  takes  two  hundred  thou- 
sand bales,  without  having  lessened  the  demand  for  the  European  market. 


EFFECT  OF  THE  PROTECTIVE  SYSTEM  ON  THE  SOUTH.   391 

British  merchants  have  found  new  markets  for  their  cotton  fabrics,  and 
the  competition,  thus  created,  while  it  has  reduced  the  price  of  the  manu- 
factured article,  has  increased  the  consumption  of  the  raw  material.  Again, 
has  the  tariff  increased  the  price  of  what  you  buy  ?  Take  the  article  of 
domestic  cotton,  for  example ;  has  not  the  American  manufacturer,  since 
the  adoption  of  this  system,  afforded  you  a  better  article  and  at  less  price 
than  before  ?  Take  a  familiar  instance,  one  in  which,  having  some  personal 
interest,  I  ought  to  be  acquainted  with  ;  take  the  article  manufactured  in 
my  own  State,  for  the  covering  of  your  cotton  bales  ;  take  any  period,  say 
six  years  before  and  six  years  since  the  tariff  of  1824;  has  the  average 
price  of  cotton  bagging  increased  or  diminished,  in  that  period  ?  I  thick 
I  can  appeal  confidently  to  those  around  me,  for  the  reply.  We  afford  you 
a  better  article  than  the  European,  and  at  a  greatly  reduced  price.  But,  I 
am  permitting  myself  to  be  carried  away  by  the  subject ;  I  will  obtrude  no 
longer  on  the  indulgence  of  this  generous  people.  I  feel  my  inability  to 
express  my  profound  and  heartfelt  gratitude,  for  the  too  flattering  reception 
you  have  given  me,  and  for  the  sentiments  you  have  been  pleased  to  honor 
me  with,  an  humble  individual  in  private  life.  I  ask  permission  to  offer  a 
sentiment : 

"  The  health  and  prosperity  of  the  people  of  the  State  of  Mississippi" 


NULLIFICATION   AND   OTHER   TOPICS 

CINCINNATI,  AUGUST  3,  1830. 

[The  Bank,  the  American  System,  and  Internal  Improve- 
ments, are  topics  of  the  following  speech  ;  hut  Nullification  is 
the  principal  theme.  This  latter  was  about  this  time  a  novelty 
in  the  political  history  of  the  country,  as  having  just  begun  to 
be  agitated.  South  Carolina  statesmen  had  all  the  responsi- 
bility of  first  proposing  it,  and  from  that  day  to  this  they  have 
taken  the  lead  in  it.  Since  its  first  proposal,  the  doctrine  has 
branched  out  into  a  claim  of  the  right  of  secession.  As  will  be 
seen,  nullification  does  not  necessarily  imply  secession,  though 
it  may  be  difficult  to  see  how  the  former  could  be  carried  out 
without  leading  to  the  latter.  But  the  first  idea  of  nullifica- 
tion was  doubtless  limited  to  the  action  of  a  State  in  making 
null  and  void  a  Federal  law  or  laws,  within  the  circle  of  its  own 
jurisdiction,  without  contemplating  the  absolute  independence 
of  a  secession.  Seeing,  however,  that  nullification,  in  its  prac- 
tical operation,  could  hardly  stop  short  of  secession,  the  pro- 
pounders  of  the  doctrine,  in  its  first  and  limited  signification, 
afterward  came  boldly  up  to  the  claim  of  the  right  of  secession  ; 
and  that  is  the  present  (1856)  aspect  of  the  question.  The 
theory  of  nullification,  as  first  entertained,  supposed  and  as- 
sumed that  any  State,  by  its  legislation  and  courts,  could  nullify, 
within  its  own  limits,  such  laws  of  the  United  States  as  its  own 
authorities  might  adjudge  to  be  unconstitutional,  so  that  they 
could  not  be  executed  under  its  jurisdiction  ;  and  here,  perhaps, 
it  was  thought  that  nullification  would  stop,  till  the  federal 
Government  should  repeal  the  obnoxious  laws.  But,  to  be  re- 
lieved from  the  embarrassments  of  such  a  position,  and  to  make 
thorough  work,  the  nullifiers  became  secessionists,  holding  that 
the  federal  Union  is  a  voluntary  compact,  which  either  of  the 
parties  could  dissolve  at  will,  in  the  same  manner  as  they  had 
made  it.  This,  as  will  be  seen,  becomes  a  momentous  question, 
so  far  as  it  is  seriously  entertained.     Though  the  right  of  seces- 


ON   NULLIFICATION   AND   OTHER   TOPICS.  393 

sion  had  not  been  agitated  when  Mr.  Clay  delivered  the  follow- 
ing speech,  he  foresaw  that  nullification  would  end  in  that.     He 
therefore  treated  the  subject  in  its  broadest  sense,  and  used  the 
terms  nullification  and  secession  interchangeably.     The  Consti- 
tution of  the  United  States  had  erected  a  supreme  tribunal,  in 
the  Supreme  Court,  to  determine  what  was  law  for  States  as  well 
as  for  other  parties,  and  it  was  absurd  to  suppose  that  the  con- 
stitutionality of  a  law,  when  a  State  is  a  party,  could  be  decided 
anywhere  else.     Nor  is  it  less  absurd  to  suppose  that  one  of 
thirty  or  more  parties  to  the  Union  has  a  right  to  dissolve  it. 
By  the  federal  compact,  the  sovereignty  of  a  State  can  never 
trespass  on  federal  jurisdiction,  any  more  than  on  the  jurisdic- 
tion of  a  foreign  State.     The  laws  of  the  United  States,  so  far 
as  they  extend  over  the  jurisdiction  of  a  State,  are  supreme,  and 
State  authority  can  extend  no  further  than  its  own  legislation 
made  in  conformity  with  this  rule,  the  Supreme  Court  of  the 
United  States  being  always  the  judge  of  such  conformity,  as  oc- 
casion may  require.     Federal  law,  therefore,  has  as  good  a  title 
within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  States  as  the  State  laws,  and  so 
much  better  as   that   the   former  is  supreme  over  the  latter. 
The  sovereignty  of  the  federal  government,  within  the  bounds 
of  the  States,  is  limited  by  the  federal  Constitution,  and  by  the 
same  instrument  the  sovereignty  of  the  States  is  limited.     The 
sovereignty  of  the  States  is  absolute  only  within  these  prescribed 
limits.     It  is  impossible,  in  the  nature  of  the  federal  compact, 
that  a  State  should  seize  on  that  part  of  the  federal  jurisdic- 
tion which  lies  within  its  own  limits,  which  the  right  of  seces- 
sion supposes.    If  the  State  has  rights  under  its  own  jurisdiction, 
so  has  the  federal  government  rights  in  the  same  place,  and  the 
latter  are  always  supreme  over  the  former.     It  is  not  possible, 
therefore,  that  a  State  should  move  a  single  inch  in  the  line  of 
secession  ;  much  less  could  it  nullify  a  law  of  the  United  States. 
To  attempt  either  would  be  rebellion,  and  a  revolution. 

This  speech  was  delivered  by  Mr.  Clay,  at  a  collation  made  for 
him  by  the  mechanics  of  Cincinnati,  in  response  to  the  follow- 
ing toast : 

"  Our  valued  guest :  It  is  his  highest  eulogium,  that  the  name  of  Henry  Clay 
is  inseparably  associated  with  the  best  interests  of  the  country,  as  their  asserter 
and  advocate."] 

Mr.  President  and  Fellow-citizens — In  rising  to  make  the  acknowl- 
edgments which  are  due  from  me,  for  the  sentiment  which  has  been  just 
drunk,  and  for  the  honors  which  have  been  spontaneously  rendered  to  me 


394  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY    CLAY. 

on  my  approach,  and  during  my  visit  to  this  city,  I  feel  more  than  ever 
the  incompetency  of  all  language  adequately  to  express  the  grateful  feel- 
ings of  my  heart.  Of  these  distinguished  honors,  crowned  heads  them- 
selves might  well  be  proud.  They  indeed  possess  a  value  far  surpassing 
that  of  any  similar  testimonies  which  could  be  offered  to  the  chief  of  an 
absolute  government.  There,  they  are,  not  unfrequently,  tendered  by  re- 
luctant subjects,  awed  by  a  sense  of  terror,  or  impelled  by  a  sense  of  ser- 
vility. Here,  in  this  land  of  equal  laws  and  equal  liberty,  they  are  pre- 
sented to  a  private  fellow  citizen,  possessing  neither  office  nor  power,  nor 
enjoying  any  rights  and  privileges  which  are  not  common  to  every  mem- 
ber of  the  community.  Power  could  not  buy  nor  deter  them.  And,  what 
confers  an  estimable  value  on  them  to  me — what  makes  them  alone  worthy 
of  you,  or  more  acceptable  to  their  object,  is,  that  they  are  offered,  not  to 
the  man,  but  to  the  public  principles  and  public  interests,  which  you  are 
pleased  to  associate  with  his  name.  On  this  occasion  too,  they  emanate 
from  one  of  those  great  productive  classes  which  form  the  main  pillars  of 
public  liberty,  and  public  prosperity.  I  thank  you,  fellow-citizens,  most 
cordially,  for  these  endearing  proofs  of  your  friendly  attachment.  They 
have  made  an  impression  of  gratitude  on  my  heart,  which  can  never  be 
effaced,  during  the  residue  of  my  life.  I  avail  myself  of  this  last  opportu- 
nity of  being  present  at  any  large  collection  of  my  fellow-citizens  of  Ohio, 
during  my  present  visit,  to  express  my  respectful  acknowledgments,  for  the 
hospitality  and  kindness  with  which  I  have  been  everywhere  received  and 
entertained. 

Throughout  my  journey,  undertaken  solely  for  private  purposes,  there  has 
been  a  constant  effort  on  my  side,  to  repress,  and,  on  that  of  my  fellow- 
citizens  of  Ohio,  to  exhibit  public  manifestations  of  their  affection  and  con- 
fidence. It  has  been  marked  by  a  succession  of  civil  triumphs.  I  have 
been  escorted  from  village  to  village,  and  have  everywhere  found  myself 
surrounded  by  large  concourses  of  my  fellow-citizens,  often  of  both  sex§s, 
greeting  and  welcoming  me.  Nor  should  I  do  justice  to  my  feelings,  if  I 
confined  the  expression  of  my  obligations  to  those  only  with  whom  I  had 
the  happiness  to  agree,  on  a  late  public  event.  They  are  equally  due  to 
the  candid  and  liberal  of  those  from  whom  it  was  my  misfortune  to  differ 
on  that  occasion,  for  their  exercise  toward  me  of  all  the  rights  of  hospital- 
ity and  neighborly  courtesy.  It  is  true,  that  in  one  or  two  of  the  towns 
through  which  I  passed,  I  was  informed,  that  attempts  were  made,  by  a  few 
political  zealots,  to  dissuade  portions  of  my  fellow-citizens  from  visiting  and 
saluting  me.  These  zealots  seemed  to  apprehend,  that  an  invading  army 
was  about  to  enter  the  town  ;  that  it  was  necessary  to  sound  the  bells,  to 
beat  the  drums,  to  point  the  cannon,  and  to  make  all  needful  preparations 
for  a  resolute  assault,  and  a  gallant  defense.  They  were  accordingly  seen 
in  the  streets,  and  at  public  places,  beating  up  for  recruits,  and  endeavoring 
to  drill  their  men.  But  I  believe  there  were  only  a  few  who  were  awed 
by  their  threats,  or  seduced  by  their  bounty,  to  enlist  in  such  a  cause.    The 


ON   NULLIFICATION   AND   OTHER   TOPICS.  395 

great  body  of  those  who  thought  differently  from  me,  in  the  instance  refer- 
red to,  remained  firm  and  immovable.  They  could  not  comprehend  that 
it  was  wrong  to  extend  to  a  stranger  from  a  neighboring  State,  the  civilities 
which  belong  to  social  life.  They  could  not  comprehend  that  it  was  right 
to  transform  political  differences  into  deadly  animosities.  Seeing  that 
varieties  in  the  mode  of  worshiping  the  great  Ruler  of  the  universe  did 
not  disturb  the  harmony  of  private  intercourse,  they  could  not  comprehend 
the  propriety  of  extending  to  mortal  man  a  sacrifice  which  is  not  offered 
to  our  immortal  Father,  of  all  the  friendly  and  social  feelings  of  our  nature, 
because  we  could  not  all  agree  as  to  the  particular  exercise  of  the  elective 
franchise.  As  independent  and  intelligent  freemen,  they  would  not  con- 
sent to  submit  to  an  arrogant  usurpation  which  assumed  the  right  to  con- 
trol their  actions,  and  to  regulate  the  feelings  of  their  hearts,  and  they 
scorned  with  indignation,  to  yield  obedience  to  the  mandates  of  would-be 
dictators.  To  quiet  the  apprehension  of  these  zealots,  I  assure  them,  that 
I  do  not  march  at  the  head  of  any  military  force  ;  that  I  have  neither 
horse,  foot,  nor  dragoons,  and  that  I  travel  with  my  friend  Charles  (a  black 
boy,  residing  in  my  family,  for  whom  I  feel  the  same  sort  of  attachment 
that  I  do  for  my  own  children),  without  sword,  pistol,  or  musket!  An- 
other species  of  attempted  embarrassment  has  been  practiced  by  an  indi- 
vidual of  this  city.  About  an  hour  before  I  left  my  lodgings  for  this  spot 
he  caused  a  packet  to  be  left  in  my  room  by  a  little  boy,  who  soon  made 
his  exit.  Upon  opening  it,  I  looked  at  the  signature,  and  that  was  enough 
for  me.  It  contained  a  long  list  of  interrogatories,  which  I  was  required 
publicly  to  answer.  I  read  only  one  or  two  of  them.  There  are  some 
men  whose  contact  is  pollution.  I  can  recognize  no  right  in  the  person  in 
question  to  catechize  me.  I  can  have  no  intercourse  with  one  who  is  a 
disgrace  to  the  gallant  and  generous  nation  from  which  he  sprang.  I  can 
not  stoop  to  be  thus  interrogated  by  a  man  whose  nomination  to  a  paltry 
office,  was  rejected  by  nearly  the  unanimous  vote  of  the  Senate  ;  I  must  be 
excused  if,  when  addressing  my  friends,  the  mechanics  of  Cincinnati,  I  will 
not  speak  from  his  notes.  On  the  renewal  of  the  charter  of  the  present 
bank  of  the  United  States,  which  I  believe  formed  the  subject  of  one  or 
two  of  these  interrogatories,  I  will  say  a  few  words  for  your,  not  his  sake. 
I  will  observe,  in  the  first  place,  that  I  am  not  in  favor  of  such  a  bank  as 
was  recommended  in  the  message  of  the  president  of  the  United  States,  at 
the  commencement  of  the  last  session  of  Congress  ;  that,  with  the  commit- 
tee of  the  two  Houses,  I  concur  in  thinking  it  would  be  an  institution  of  a 
dangerous  and  alarming  character  ;  and  that  fraught  as  it  would  be  with 
the  most  corrupting  tendencies,  it  might  be  made  powerfully  instrumental 
in  overturning  our  liberties.  As  to  the  existing  bank,  I  think  it  has  been 
generally  administered,  and  particularly  of  late  years,  with  great  ability  and 
integrity ;  that  it  has  fulfilled  all  the  reasonable  expectations  of  those  who 
constituted  it ;  and,  with  the  same  committees,  I  think  it  has  made  an  ap- 
proximation toward  the  equalization  of  the  currency,  as  great  as  is  practi- 


396  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY   CLAY. 

cable.  Whether  the  charter  ought  to  be  renewed  or  not,  near  six  years 
hence,  in  my  judgment,  is  a  question  of  expediency  to  be  decided  by  the 
then  existing  state  of  the  country.  It  will  be  necessary  at  that  time,  to 
look  carefully  at  the  condition  both  of  the  bank  and  of  tha  Union.  To  as- 
certain, if  the  public  debt  shall,  in  the  mean  time,  be  paid  off,  what  effect 
that  will  produce  ?  What  will  be  our  then  financial  condition  ?  what  that 
of  local  banks,  the  state  of  our  commerce,  foreign  and  domestic,  as  well  as 
the  concerns  of  our  currency  generally  ?  I  am,  therefore,  not  now  prepared 
to  say,  whether  the  charter  ought,  or  ought  not,  to  be  renewed  on  the  ex- 
piration of  its  present  term.  The  bank  may  become  insolvent,  and  may 
hereafter  forfeit  all  pretensions  to  a  renewal.  The  question  is  premature. 
I  may  not  be  alive  to  form  any  opinion  upon  it.  It  belongs  to  posterity, 
and  if  they  would  have  the  goodness  to  decide  for  us  some  of  the  perplex- 
ing and  practical  questions  of  the  present  day,  we  might  be  disposed  to  de- 
cide that  remote  question  for  them.  As  it  is,  it  ought  to  be  indefinitely 
postponed. 

With  respect  to  the  American  system,  which  demands  your  undivided 
approbation,  and  in  regard  to  which  you  are  pleased  to  estimate  much  too 
highly  my  service,  its  great  object  is  to  secure  the  independence  of  our 
country,  to  augment  its  wealth,  and  to  diffuse  the  comforts  of  civilization 
throughout  society.  That  object,  it  has  been  supposed,  can  be  best  ac- 
complished by  introducing,  encouraging,  and  protecting  the  arts  among  us. 
It  may  be  called  a  system  of  real  reciprocity,  under  the  operation  of  which 
one  citizen  or  one  part  of  the  country,  can  exchange  one  description  of  the 
produce  of  labor,  with  another  citizen  or  another  part  of  the  country,  for  a 
different  description  of  the  produce  of  labor.  It  is  a  system  which  de- 
velops, improves,  and  perfects  the  capabilities  of  our  common  country,  and 
enables  us  to  avail  ourselves  of  all  the  resources  with  which  Providence 
has  blessed  us.  To  the  laboring  classes  it  is  invaluable,  since  it  increases  and 
multiplies  the  demands  for  their  industry,  and  gives  them  an  option  of 
employments.  It  adds  power  and  strength  to  our  Union,  by  new  ties  of 
interest,  blending  and  connecting  together  all  its  parts,  and  creating  an  in- 
terest with  each  in  the  prosperity  of  the  whole.  It  secures  to  our  own 
country,  whose  skill  and  enterprise,  properly  fostered  and  sustained,  can 
not  be  surpassed,  those  vast  profits  which  are  made  in  other  countries  by 
the  operation  of  converting  the  raw  material  into  manufactured  articles. 
It  naturalizes,  and  creates  within  the  bosom  of  our  country  all  the  arts ; 
and,  mixing  the  farmer,  manufacturer,  mechanic,  artist,  and  those  engaged 
in  other  vocations  together,  admits  of  those  mutual  exchanges,  so  condu- 
cive to  the  prosperity  of  all  and  every  one,  free  from  the  perils  of  sea  and 
war  :  all  this  it  effects,  while  it  nourishes  and  leaves  a  fair  scope  to  foreign 
trade.  Suppose  we  were  a  nation  that  clad  ourselves,  and  made  all  the 
implements  necessary  to  civilization,  but  did  not  produce  our  own  bread, 
which  we  brought  from  foreign  countries,  although  our  own  was  capable 
of  producing  it,  under  the  influence  of  suitable  laws  of  protection,  ought 


ON   NULLIFICATION   AND   OTHER    TOPICS.  397 

not  such  laws  to  he  enacted  ?  The  case  supposed  is  not  essentially  dif- 
ferent from  the  real  state  of  things  which  led  to  the  adoption  of  the  Amer- 
ican system. 

That  system  has  had  a  wonderful  success.  It  has  more  than  realized  all 
the  hopes  of  its  founders.  It  has  completely  falsified  all  the  predictions  of 
its  opponents.  It  has  increased  the  wealth,  and  power,  and  population  of 
the  nation.  It  has  diminished  the  price  of  articles  of  consumption,  and 
has  placed  them  within  the  reach  of  a  far  greater  number  of  our  people 
than  could  have  found  means  to  command  them,  if  they  had  been  manu- 
factured abroad  instead  of  at  home. 

But  it  is  useless  to  dwell  on  the  argument  in  support  of  this  beneficent 
system  before  this  audience.  It  will  be  of  more  consequence  here  to  ex- 
amine some  of  the  objections  which  are  still  urged  against  it,  and  the 
means  which  are  proposed  to  subvert  it.  These  objections  are  now  prin- 
cipally confined  to  its  operation  upon  the  great  staple  of  cotton  avooI,  and 
they  are  urged  with  most  vehemence  in  a  particular  State.  If  the  objec- 
tions are  well  founded,  the  system  should  be  modified,  as  far  as  it  can  con- 
sistently with  interest,  in  other  parts  of  the  Union.  If  they  are  not  well 
founded,  it  is  to  be  hoped  they  will  be  finally  abandoned. 

In  approaching  the  subject,  I  have  thought  it  of  importance  to  inquire 
what  was  the  profit  made  upon  capital  employed  in  the  culture  of  cotton,  at 
its  present  reduced  price  ?  The  result  has  been  information  that  it  nets  from 
seven  to  eighteen  per  cent,  per  annum,  varying  according  to  the  advantage 
of  situation,  and  the  degree  of  skill,  judgment,  and  industry,  applied  to  the 
production  of  the  article.  But  the  lowest  rate  of  profit,  in  the  scale,  is 
more  than  the  greatest  amount  which  is  made  on  capital  employed  in  the 
farming  portions  of  the  Union. 

If  the  cotton  planter  has  any  just  complaint  against  the  expediency  of 
the  American  system,  it  must  be  founded  on  the  fact  that  he  either  sells  less 
of  his  staple,  or  sells  at  lower  prices,  or  purchases  for  consumption  articles 
at  dearer  rates,  or  of  worse  qualities,  in  consequence  of  that  system,  than 
he  would  do  if  it  did  not  exist.  If  he  would  neither  sell  more  of  his 
staple,  nor  sell  it  at  better  prices,  nor  could  purchase  better  or  cheaper  ar- 
ticles for  consumption,  provided  the  system  did  not  exist,  then  he  has  no 
cause,  on  the  score  of  burdensome  operation,  to  complain  of  the  system, 
but  must  look  to  other  sources  for  the  grievances  which  he  supposes  afflict 
him. 

As  respects  the  sale  of  his  staple,  it  would  be  indifferent  to  the  planter, 
whether  one  portion  of  it  was  sold  in  Europe,  and  the  other  in  America, 
provided  the  aggregate  of  both  were  equal  to  all  that  he  could  sell  in  one 
market,  if  he  had  but  one,  and  provided  he  could  command  the  same  price 
in  both  cases.  The  double  market  would  indeed  be  something  better  for 
him,  because  of  its  greater  security  in  time  of  war  as  well  as  in  peace,  and 
because  it  would  be  attended  with  less  perils  and  less  charges.  If  there  be 
an  equal  amount  of  the  raw  material  manufactured,  it  must  be  immaterial  to 


398  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

the  cotton  planter,  in  the  sale  of  the  article,  whether  there  be  two  theaters 
of  the  manufacture,  one  in  Europe  and  the  other  in  America,  or  but  one 
in  Europe ;  or  if  there  be  a  difference,  it  will  be  in  favor  of  the  two  places 
of  manufacture,  instead  of  one,  for  reasons  already  assigned,  and  others  that 
will  be  hereafter  stated. 

It  could  be  of  no  advantage  to  the  cotton  planter,  if  all  the  cotton  now 
manufactured  both  in  Europe  and  America,  was  manufactured  exclusively 
in  Europe,  and  an  amount  of  cotton  fabrics  should  be  brought  back  from 
Europe,  equal  to  both  what  is  now  brought  from  there,  and  what  is  manu- 
factured in  the  United  States,  together.  While  he  would  gain  nothing, 
the  United  States  would  lose  the  profit  and  employment  resulting  from  the 
manufacture  of  that  portion  which  is  now  wrought  up  by  the  manufac- 
turers of  the  United  States. 

Unless,  therefore,  it  can  be  shown,  that,  by  the  reduction  of  import 
duties,  and  the  overthrow  of  the  American  system,  and  by  limiting  the 
manufacture  of  cotton  to  Europe,  a  greater  amount  of  the  raw  material 
would  be  consumed  than  is  at  present,  it  is  difficult  to  see  what  interest,  so 
far  as  respects  the  sale  of  that  staple,  the  cotton  planter  has  in  the  sub- 
version of  that  system.  If  a  reduction  of  duties  would  admit  of  larger 
investments  in  British  or  European  fabrics  of  cotton,  and  their  subsequent 
importation  into  this  country,  this  additional  supply  would  take  the  place, 
if  consumed,  of  an  equal  amount  of  American  manufactures,  and  conse- 
quently would  not  augment  the  general  consumption  of  the  raw  material. 
Additional  importation  does  not  necessarily  imply  increased  consumption, 
especially  when  it  is  effected  by  a  policy  which  would  impair  the  ability 
to  purchase  and  consume. 

Upon  the  supposition  just  made,  of  a  restriction  to  Europe  of  the  man- 
ufacture of  cotton,  would  more  or  less  of  the  article  be  consumed  than 
now  is  ?  More  could  not  be,  unless,  in  consequence  of  such  a  monopoly 
of  the  manufacture,  Europe  could  sell  more  than  she  now  does.  But  to 
what  countries  could  she  sell  more  ?  She  gets  the  raw  material  now  un- 
burdened by  any  duties  except  such  moderate  ones  as  her  policy,  not  likely 
to  be  changed,  imposes.  She  is  enabled  thereby  to  sell  as  much  of  the 
manufactured  article  as  she  can  find  markets  for  in  the  States  within  her 
own  limits,  or  in  foreign  countries.  The  destruction  of  the  American 
manufacture  would  not  induce  her  to  sell  cheaper,  but  might  enable  her  to 
sell  dearer,  than  she  now  does.  The  ability  of  those  foreign  countries,  to 
purchase  and  consume,  would  not  be  increased  by  the  annihilation  of  our 
manufactures,  and  the  monopoly  of  European  manufacture.  The  proba- 
bility is,  that  those  foreign  countries,  by  the  fact  of  that  monopoly,  and 
some  consequent  increase  of  price,  would  be  worse  and  dearer  supplied 
than  they  now  are,  under  the  operation  of  a  competition  between  America 
and  Europe  in  their  supply. 

At  most,  the  United  States,  after  the  transfer  from  their  territory  to 
Europe,  of  the   entire  manufacture  of  the  article,  could  not  consume,  of 


ON    NULLIFICATION    AND    OTHEK    TOPICS.  399 

European  fabrics  from  cotton,  a  greater  amount  than  they  now  derive  from 
Europe,  and  from  manufactures  within  their  own  limits. 

But  it  is  confidently  believed,  that  the  consumption  of  cotton  fabrics,  on 
the  supposition  which  has  been  made,  within  the  United  States,  would  be 
much  less  than  it  is  at  present.  It  would  be  less,  because  the  American 
consumer  would  not  possess  the  means  or  ability  to  purchase  as  much  of 
the  European  fabric  as  he  now  does  to  buy  the  American.  Europe  pur- 
chases but  little  of  the  produce  of  the  northern,  middle,  and  western  re- 
gions of  the  United  States.  The  staple  productions  of  those  regions  are 
excluded  from  her  consumption  by  her  policy,  or  by  her  native  supplies  of 
similar  productions.  The  effect,  therefore,  of  obliging  the  inhabitants  of 
those  regions  to  depend  upon  the  cotton  manufactures  of  Europe  for 
necessary  supplies  of  the  article,  would  be  alike  injurious  to  them,  and  to 
the  cotton  grower.  They  would  suffer  from  their  inability  to  supply  their 
wants,  and  there  would  be  a  consequent  diminution  of  the  consumption 
of  cotton.  By  the  location  of  the  manufacture  in  the  United  States,  the 
quantity  of  cotton  consumed  is  increased,  and  the  more  numerous  portion 
of  their  inhabitants,  who  would  not  be  otherwise  sufficiently  supplied,  are 
abundantly  served.  That  this  is  the  true  state  of  things,  I  think  can  not 
be  doubted  by  any  reflecting  and  unprejudiced  man.  The  establishment 
of  manufactures  within  the  United  States,  enables  the  manufacturer  to  sell 
to  the  farmer,  the  mechanic,  the  physician,  the  lawyer,  and  all  who  are 
engaged  in  other  pursuits  of  life ;  and  these,  in  their  turns,  supply  the 
manufacturer  with  subsistence,  and  whatever  else  his  wants  require. 
Under  the  influence  of  the  protecting  policy,  many  new  towns  have  been 
built,  and  old  ones  enlarged.  The  population  of  these  places  draw  their 
subsistence  frem  the  farming  interest  of  our  country,  their  fuel  from  our 
forests  and  coal  mines,  and  the  raw  materials  from  which  they  fashion  and 
fabricate,  from  the  cotton  planter  and  the  mines  of  our  country.  These 
mutual  exchanges,  so  animating  and  invigorating  to  the  industry  of 
the  people  of  the  United  States,  could  not  possibly  be  effected  be- 
tween America  and  Europe,  if  the  latter  enjoyed  the  monopoly  of  man- 
ufacturing. 

It  results,  therefore,  that,  so  far  as  the  sale  of  the  great  southern  staple 
is  concerned,  a  greater  quantity  is  sold  and  consumed,  and  consequently 
better  prices  are  obtained,  under  the  operation  of  the  American  system, 
than  would  be  without  it.  Does  that  system  oblige  the  cotton  planter  to 
buy  dearer  or  worse  articles  of  consumption  than  he  could  purchase,  if  it 
did  not  exist  ? 

The  same  course  of  American  and  European  competition,  which  enables 
him  to  sell  more  of  the  produce  of  his  industry,  and  at  better  prices,  also 
enables  him  to  buy  cheaper  and  better  articles  for  consumption.  It  can 
not  be  doubted,  that  the  tendency  of  the  competition  between  the  Euro- 
pean and  American  manufacturer,  is  to  reduce  the  price  and  improve  the 
quality   of  their  respective   fabrics,   whenever  they  come  into   collision. 


400  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

This  is  the  immutable  law  of  all  competition.  If  the  American  manufac- 
ture were  discontinued,  Europe  would  then  exclusively  furnish  those  sup- 
plies which  are  now  derived  from  the  establishments  in  both  continents ; 
and  the  first  consequence  would  be,  an  augmentation  of  the  demand,  be- 
yond the  supply,  equal  to  what  is  now  manufactured  in  the  United  States, 
but  which,  in  the  contingency  supposed,  would  be  wrought  in  Europe.  If 
the  destruction  of  the  American  manufactures  were  sudden,  there  would  be 
a  sudden  and  probably  a  considerable  rise  in  the  European  fabrics.  Al- 
though, in  the  end,  they  might  be  again  reduced,  it  is  not  likely  that  the 
ultimate  reduction  of  the  prices  would  be  to  such  rates  as  if  both  the 
workshops  of  America  and  Europe  remained  sources  of  supply.  There 
would  also  be  a  sudden  reductiou  in  the  price  of  the  raw  material,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  cessation  of  American  demand.  Aud  this  reduction  would 
be  permanent,  if  the  supposition  be  correct,  that  there  would  be  a  diminu- 
tion in  the  consumption  of  cotton  fabrics,  arising  out  of  the  inability,  on 
the  part  of  large  portions  of  the  people  of  the  United  States,  to  purchase 
those  of  Europe. 

That  the  effect  of  competition  between  the  European  and  American  man- 
ufacture, has  been  to  supply  the  American  consumer  with  cheaper  and 
better  articles,  since  the  adoption  of  the  American  system,  notwithstanding 
the  existence  of  causes  which  have  obstructed  its  fair  operation,  and  re- 
tarded its  full  development,  is  incontestable.  Both  the  freeman  and  the 
slave  are  now  better  and  cheaper  supplied  than  they  were  prior  to  the  ex- 
istence of  that  system.  Cotton  fabrics  have  diminished  in  price,  and  been 
improved  in  their  texture,  to  an  extent  that  it  is  difficult  for  the  imagination 
to  keep  pace  with.  Those  partly  of  cotton  and  partly  of  wool  are  also  bet- 
ter and  cheaper  supplied.  The  same  observation  is  applicable  to  those 
which  are  exclusively  wrought  of  wool,  iron,  or  glass.  In  short,  it  is  be- 
lieved that  there  is  not  one  item  of  the  tariff  inserted  for  the  protection  of 
native  industry,  which  has  not  fallen  in  price.  The  American  competi- 
tion has  tended  to  keep  down  the  European  rival  fabric,  and  the  European 
has  tended  to  lower  the  American. 

Of  what  then  can  the  South  Carolina  planter  justly  complain  in  the 
operation  of  this  system  ?  What  is  there  in  it  which  justifies  the  harsh 
and  strong  epithets  which  some  of  her  politicians  have  applied  to  it  ? 
What  is  there  in  her  condition,  which  warrants  their  assertion,  that  she  is 
oppressed  by  a  government  to  which  she  stands  in  the  mere  relation  of  a 
colony  ? 

She  is  oppressed  by  a  great  reduction  in  the  price  of  manufactured  ar- 
ticles of  consumption. 

She  is  oppressed  by  the  advantage  of  two  markets  for  the  sale  of  her 
valuable  staple,  and  for  the  purchase  of  objects  required  by  her  wants. 

She  is  oppressed  by  better  prices  for  that  staple  than  she  could  com- 
mand, if  the  system  to  which  they  object  did  not  exist. 

She  is  oppressed  by  the  option  of  purchasing  cheaper  and  better  articles, 


ON  NULLIFICATION   AND   OTHER   TOPICS.  401 

the  produce  of  the  hands   of  American  freemen,  instead  of  dearer  and 
worse  articles,  the  produce  of  the  hands  of  British  subjects. 

She  is  oppressed  by  the  measures  of  a  government  in  which  she  has  had, 
for  many  years,  a  larger  proportion  of  power  and  influence,  at  home  and 
abroad,  than  any  State  in  the  whole  Union,  in  comparison  with  the  popu- 
lation. 

A  glance  at  the  composition  of  the  government  of  the  Union,  will  dem- 
onstrate the  truth  of  this  last  proposition.  In  the  Senate  of  the  United 
States,  South  Carolina  having  the  presiding  officer,  exercises  nearly  one 
sixteenth  instead  of  one  twenty-fourth  part  of  both  its  legislative  and  ex- 
ecutive functions. 

In  both  branches  of  Congress,  some  of  her  citizens  now  occupy,  as 
chairmen  of  committees,  the  most  important  and  influential  stations.  In 
the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  one  of  her  citizens  being  a  mem- 
ber, she  has  one  seventh  part,  instead  of  about  one  twentieth,  her  equal 
proportion  of  the  whole  power  vested  in  that  tribunal.  Until  within  a  few 
months,  she  had  nearly  one  third  of  all  the  missions  of  the  first  grade,  from 
this  to  foreign  countries.  In  a  contingency,  which  is  far  from  impossible, 
a  citizen  of  South  Carolina  would  instantly  become  charged  with  the  ad- 
ministration of  the  whole  of  the  vast  power  and  patronage  of  the  United 
States. 

Yet  her  situation  has  been  compared  to  that  of  a  colony  which  has  no 
voice  in  the  laws  enacted  by  the  parent  country  for  its  subjection  !  And 
to  be  relieved  from  this  cruel  state  of  vassalage,  and  to  put  down  a  sys- 
tem which  has  been  established  by  the  united  voice  of  all  America,  some 
of  her  politicians  have  broached  a  doctrine  as  new  as  it  would  be  alarm- 
ing, if  it  were  sustained  by  numbers  in  proportion  to  the  zeal  and  fervid 
eloquence  with  which  it  is  inculcated.  I  call  it  a  novel  doctrine.  I  am 
not  unaware  that  attempts  have  been  made  to  support  it  on  the  authority 
of  certain  acts  of  my  native  and  adopted  States.  Although  many  of  their 
citizens  are  much  more  competent  than  I  am  to  vindicate  them  from  this 
imputation  of  purposes  of  disunion  and  rebellion,  my  veneration  and  af- 
fection for  them  both  urge  me  to  bear  my  testimony  of  their  innocence  of 
such  a  charge.  At  the  epoch  of  1*798-9, 1  had  just  attained  my  majority, 
and  although  I  was  too  young  to  share  in  the  public  councils  of  my  coun- 
try, I  was  acquainted  with  many  of  the  actors  of  that  memorable  period  ; 
I  knew  their  views,  and  formed  and  freely  expressed  my  own  opinions  on 
passing  events.  The  then  administration  of  the  general  government  was 
believed  to  entertain  views  (whether  the  belief  was  right  or  wrong  is  not 
material  to  this  argument,  and  is  now  an  affair  of  history)  hostile  to  the 
existence  of  the  liberties  of  this  country.  The  alien  and  sedition  laws, 
particularly,  and  other  measures,  were  thought  to  be  the  consequences  and 
proofs  of  those  views.  If  the  administration  had  such  a  purpose,  it  was 
feared  that  the  extreme  case,  justifying  forcible  resistance,  might  arise,  but 
no  one  believed  that,  in  point  of  fact,  it  had  arrived.     No  one  contended 

26 


402  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

that  a  single  State  possessed  the  power  to  annul  the  deliberate  acts  of  the 
whole.  And  the  best  evidence  of  these  remarks  is  the  fact,  that  the  most 
odious  of  those  laws  (the  sedition  act),  was  peaceably  enforced  in  the  cap- 
ital of  that  great  State  which  took  the  lead  in  opposition  to  the  existing 
administration. 

The  doctrines  of  that  day,  and  they  are  as  true  at  this,  were,  that  the 
federal  government  is  a  limited  government ;  that  it  has  no  powers,  but 
the  granted  powers.  Virginia  contended,  that  in  case  "  of  a  palpable, 
deliberate,  and  dangerous  exercise  of  other  powers  not  granted  by  said 
compact,  the  States,  who  are  parties  thereto,  have  the  right  to  interpose 
for  arresting  the  progress  of  the  evil,  and  for  maintaining,  within  their  re- 
spective limits,  the  authorities,  rights,  and  liberties,  appertaining  to  them." 
Kentucky  declared,  that  the  "  several  States,  that  framed  that  instrument, 
the  federal  Constitution,  being  sovereign  and  independent,  have  the  un- 
questionable right  to  judge  of  its  instructions,  and  a  nullification  by  those 
sovereignties,  of  all  unauthorized  acts,  done  under  color  of  that  instrument, 
is  the  rightful  remedy." 

Neither  of  these  two  commonwealths  asserted  the  right  of  a  single  State 
to  interpose  and  annul  an  act  of  the  whole.  This  is  an  inference  drawn 
from  the  doctrines  then  laid  down,  and  it  is  not  a  principle  expressly  as- 
serted or  fairly  deducible  from  the  language  of  either.  Both  refer  to  the 
States  collectively  (and  not  individually),  when  they  assert  their  right,  in 
case  of  federal  usurpation,  to  interpose  "  for  arresting  the  progress  of  evil." 
Neither  State  ever  did,  no  State  ever  yet  has,  by  its  separate  legislation,  un- 
dertaken to  set  aside  an  act  of  Congress. 

That  the  States  collectively  may  interpose  their  authority  to  check  the 
evils  of  federal  •  usurpation,  is  manifest.  They  may  dissolve  the  Union. 
They  may  alter,  at  pleasure,  the  character  of  the  Constitution,  by  amend- 
ment ;  they  may  annul  any  acts  purporting  to  have  been  passed  in  con- 
formity to  it,  or  they  may,  by  their  elections,  change  the  functionaries  to 
whom  the  administration  of  its  powers  is  confided.  But  no  one  State,  by 
itself,  is  competent  to  accomplish  these  objects.  The  power  of  a  single 
State  to  annul  an  act  of  the  whole,  has  been  reserved  for  the  discovery  of 
some  politicians  in  South  Carolina. 

It  is  not  my  purpose,  upon  an  occasion  so  unfit,  to  discuss  this  preten- 
sion. Upon  another  and  a  more  suitable  theater,  it  has  been  examined 
and  refuted,  with  an  ability  and  eloquence  which  have  never  been  sur- 
passed on  the  floor  of  Congress.  But,  as  it  is  announced  to  be  one  of  the 
means  which  is  intended  to  be  employed  to  break  down  the  American  sys- 
tem, I  trust  that  I  shall  be  excused  for  a  few  additional  passing  observa- 
tions. On  a  late  festive  occasion,  in  the  State  where  it  appears  to  find 
most  favor,  it  is  said,  by  a  gentleman  whom  I  once  proudly  called  my 
friend,  and  toward  whom  I  have  done  nothing  to  change  that  relation — 
a  gentleman  who  has  been  high  in  the  councils  and  confidence  of  the 
nation,  that  the  tariff  must  be  resisted  at  all  hazards.     Another  gentleman, 


ON   NULLIFICATION   AND   OTHER   TOPICS.  403 

who  is  a  candidate  for  the  chief  magistracy  of  that  State,  declares  that  the 
time  and  the  case  for  resistance  had  arrived.  And  a  third,  a  senator  of 
the  United  States,  who  enjoys  unbounded  confidence  with  the  American 
executive,  laid  down  principles  aud  urged  arguments  tending  directly  and 
inevitably  to  violent  resistance,  although  he  did  not  indicate  that  as  his 
specific  remedy. 

The  doctrine  of  some  of  the  South  Carolina  politicians  is,  that  it  is  com- 
petent to  that  State  to  annul,  within  its  limits,  the  authority  of  an  act 
deliberately  passed  by  the  Congress  of  the  United  States.  They  do  not 
appear  to  have  looked  much  beyond  the  simple  act  of  nullification,  into 
the  consequences  which  would  ensue,  and  have  not  distinctly  announced, 
whether  one  of  them  might  not  necessarily  be,  to  light  up  a.  civil  war. 
They  seem,  however,  to  sirppose,  that  the  State  might,  after  the  act  was 
performed,  remain  a  member  of  the  Union.  Now  if  one  State  can,  by  an 
act  of  its  separate  power,  absolve  itself  from  the  obligations  of  a  law  of 
Congress,  and  continue  a  part  of  the  Union,  it  could  hardly  be  expected, 
that  any  other  State  would  render  obedience  to  the  same  law.  Either 
every  other  State  would  follow  the  nullifying  example,  or  Congress  would 
feel  itself  constrained,  by  a  sense  of  equal  duty  to  all  parts  of  the  Union, 
to  repeal  altogether  the  nullified  law.  Thus,  the  doctrine  of  South  Car- 
olina, although  it  nominally  assumes  to  act  for  one  State  only,  in  effect, 
would  be  leoislatino-  for  the  whole  Union. 

Congress  embodies  the  collective  will  of  the  whole  Union,  and  that  of 
South  Carolina  among  its  other  members.  The  legislation  of  Congress  is, 
therefore,  founded  upon  the  basis  of  the  representation  of  all.  In  the 
Legislature,  or  a  convention  of  South  Carolina,  the  will  of  the  people  of 
that  State  is  alone  collected.  They  alone  are  represented,  and  the  people 
of  no  other  State  have  any  voice  in  their  proceedings.  To  set  up  for  that 
a  claim,  by  a  separate  exercise  of  its  power,  to  legislate,  in  effect,  for  the 
whole  Union,  is  to  assert  a  pretension  at  war  with  the  fundamental  prin- 
ciples of  all  representative  and  free  governments.  It  would  practically 
subject  the  unrepresented  people  of  all  other  parts  of  the  Union  to  the 
arbitrary  and  despotic  power  of  one  State.  It  would  substantially  convert 
them  into  colonies,  bound  by  the  parental  authority  of  that  State. 

Nor  can  this  enormous  pretension  derive  any  support  from  the  considera- 
tion, that  the  power  to  annul,  is  different  from  the  power  to  originate  laws. 
Both  powers  are,  in  their  nature,  legislative ;  and  the  mischiefs  which 
might  accrue  to  the  republic  from  the  annulment  of  its  wholesome  laws, 
may  be  just  as  great  as  those  which  would  flow  from  the  origination  of 
bad  laws.  There  are  three  things  to  which,  more  than  all  others,  man- 
kind in  all  ages,  have  shown  themselves  to  be  attached,  their  religion,  their 
laws,  and  their  language. 

But  it  has  been  argued,  in  the  most  solemn  manner,  "  that  the  acknowl- 
edgments of  the  exclusive  right  of  the  federal  government  to  determine 
the  limits  of  its  own  powers,  amounts  to  a  recognition  of  the  absolute 


404  SPEECHES  OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

supremacy  over  the  States  and  the  people,  and  involves  the  sacrifice  not 
only  of  our  dearest  rights  and  interests,  but  the  very  existence  of  the 
southern  States. 

In  cases  where  there  are  two  systems  of  government,  operating  at  the 
same  time  and  place,  over  the  same  people,  the  one  general,  the  other  local 
or  particular,  one  system  or  the  other  must  possess  the  right  to  decide  upon 
the  extent  of  the  powers,  in  cases  of  collision,  which  are  claimed  by  the 
general  government.  No  third  party,  of  sufficient  impartiality,  weight, 
and  responsibility,  other  than  such  a  tribunal  as  a  Supreme  Court,  has  yet 
been  devised,  or  perhaps  can  be  created. 

The  doctrine  of  one  side  is,  that  the  general  government,  though  limited 
in  its  nature,  must  necessarily  possess  the  power  to  ascertain  what  authority 
it  has,  and,  by  consequence,  the  extent  of  that  authority.  And  that,  if  its 
legislative  oi.  executive  functionaries,  by  act,  transcend  that  authority,  the 
question  may  be  brought  before  the  Supreme  Court,  and,  being  affirmatively 
decided  by  that  tribunal,  their  act  must  be  obeyed  until  repealed  or  altered 
by  competent  power. 

Against  the  tendency  of  this  doctrine  to  absorb  all  power,  those  who 
maintain  it  think  there  are  reasonable,  and,  they  hope,  sufficient  securities. 
In  the  first  place,  all  are  represented  in  every  legislative  or  executive  act, 
and,  of  course,  each  State  can  exert  its  proper  influence,  to  prevent  the 
adoption  of  any  that  may  be  deemed  prejudicial  or  unconstitutional.  Then, 
there  are  sacred  oaths,  elections,  public  virtue  and  intelligence,  the  power 
of  impeachment,  a  common  subjection  to  both  systems  of  those  functiona- 
ries who  act  under  either,  the  right  of  the  States  to  interpose  and  amend 
the  Constitution,  or  to  dissolve  the  Union ;  and,  finally,  the  right,  in  ex- 
treme cases,  when  all  other  remedies  fail,  to  resist  insupportable  op- 
pression. 

The  necessity  being  felt,  by  the  framers  of  the  Constitution,  to  declare 
which  system  should  be  supreme,  and  believing  that  the  securities  now 
enumerated,  or  some  of  them,  were  adequate,  they  have  accordingly  pro- 
vided, that  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  and  the  laws  made  in 
pursuance  of  it,  and  all  treaties  made  under  the  authority  of  the  United 
States,  shall  be  the  supreme  law  of  the  land  ;  and  that  the  judicial  power 
6hall  extend  to  all  cases  arising  under  the  Constitution,  laws,  or  treaties,  of 
the  United  States. 

The  South  Carolina  doctrine,  on  the  other  side,  is,  that  that  State  has 
the  right  to  determine  the  limits  of  the  powers  granted  to  the  general 
government ;  and  that  whenever  any  of  its  acts  transcend  those  limits,  in 
the  opinion  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina,  she  is  competent  to  annul 
them.  If  the  power,  with  which  the  federal  government  is  invested  by 
the  Constitution,  to  determine  the  limits  of  its  authority,  be  liable  to  the 
possible  danger  of  ultimate  consolidation,  and  all  the  safeguards  which 
have  been  mentioned  might  prove  inadequate,  is  not  this  power,  claimed 
for  South  Carolina,  fraught  with  infinitely  more  certain,  immediate,  and 


ON   NULLIFICATION   AND   OTHER   TOPICS.  405 

fatal  danger  ?  It  would  reverse  the  rule  of  supremacy  prescribed  in  the 
Constitution.  It  would  render  the  authority  of  a  single  State  paramount 
to  that  of  the  whole  Union.  For,  undoubtedly,  that  government,  to  some 
extent,  must  be  supreme,  which  can  annul  and  set  aside  the  acts  of 
another. 

The  securities  which  the  people  of  other  parts  of  the  United  States 
possess  against  the  abuse  of  this  tremendous  power  claimed  for  South 
Carolina,  will  be  found,  on  comparison,  to  be  greatly  inferior  to  those  which 
she  has  against  the  possible  abuses  of  the  general  government.  They  have 
no  voice  in  her  councils ;  they  could  not,  by  the  exercise  of  the  elective 
franchise,  change  her  rulers;  they  could  not  impeach  her  judges,  they 
could  not  alter  her  Constitution,  nor  abolish  her  government. 

Under  the  South  Carolina  doctrine,  if  established,  the  consequence  would 
be  a  dissolution  of  the  Union,  immediate,  inevitable,  irresistible.  There 
would  be  twenty-four  chances  to  one  against  its  continued  existence.  The 
apprehended  dangers  of  the  opposite  doctrine,  remote,  contingent,  and 
hardly  possible,  are  greatly  exaggerated ;  and,  against  their  realization,  all 
the  precautions  have  been  provided,  which  human  wisdom  and  patriotic 
foresight  could  conceive  and  devise. 

Those  who  are  opposed  to  the  supremacy  of  the  Constitution,  laws,  and 
treaties  of  the  United  States,  are  adverse  to  all  union,  whatever  contrary 
professions  they  may  make.  For  it  may  be  truly  affirmed,  that  no  con- 
federacy of  States  can  exist  without  a  power,  somewhere  residing  in  the 
government  of  that  confederacy,  to  determine  the  extent  of  the  authority 
granted  to  it  by  the  confederating  States. 

It  is  admitted  that  the  South  Carolina  doctrine  is  liable  to  abuse ;  but  it 
is  contended  that  the  patriotism  of  each  State  is  an  adequate  security,  and 
that  the  nullifying  power  would  only  be  exercised  "in  an  extraordinary 
case,  where  the  powers  reserved  to  the  States,  under  the  Constitution,  are 
usurped  by  the  federal  government."  And  is  not  the  patriotism  of  all  the 
States  as  great  a  safeguard  against  the  assumption  of  powers,  not  conferred 
upon  the  general  government,  as  the  patriotism  of  one  State  is  against  the 
denial  of  powers  which  are  clearly  granted  ?  But  the  nullifying  power  is 
only  to  be  exercised  in  an  extraordinary  case.  Who  is  to  judge  of  this 
extraordinary  case  ?  What  security  is  there,  especially  in  moments  of 
great  excitement,  that  a  State  may  not  pronounce  the  plainest  and  most 
common  exercise  of  federal  power  an  extraordinary  case  ?  The  expressions 
in  the  Constitution,  "general  welfare,"  have  been  often  justly  criticised,  and 
shown  to  convey,  in  themselves,  no  power,  although  they  may  indicate 
how  the  delegated  power  should  be  exercised.  But  this  doctrine  of  an 
extraordinary  case,  to  be  judged  of  and  applied  by  one  of  the  twenty-four 
sovereignties,  is  replete  with  infinitely  more  danger,  than  the  doctrine  of 
the  "  general  welfare"  in  the  hands  of  all. 

We  may  form  some  idea  of  future   abuses  under  the   South  Carolina 
doctrine,  by  the  application  which  is  now  proposed  to  be  made  of  it.     The 


406  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY   CLAY. 

American  system  is  said  to  furnish  an  extraordinary  case,  justifying  that 
State  to  nullify  it.  The  power  to  regulate  foreign  commerce  by  a  tariff,  so 
adjusted  as  to  foster  our  domestic  manufactures,  has  been  exercised  from 
the  commencement  of  our  present  Constitution  down  to  the  last  session 
of  Congress.  I  have  been  a  member  of  the  House  of  Representatives  at 
three  different  periods,  when  the  subject  of  the  tariff  was  debated  at  great  r 
length,  and  on  neither,  according  to  my  recollection,  was  the  want  of  a 
constitutional  power  in  Congress,  to  enact  it,  dwelt  on  as  forming  a  serious 
and  substantial  objection  to  its  passage.  On  the  last  occasion  (I  think  it 
was)  in  which  I  participated  in  the  debate,  it  was  incidentally  said  to  be 
against  the  spirit  of  the  Constitution.  AVhile  the  authority  of  the  father 
of  the  Constitution  is  invoked  to  sanction,  by  a  perversion  of  his  meaning, 
principles  of  disunion  and  rebellion,  it  is  rejected  to  sustain  the  contro- 
verted power,  although  his  testimony  in  support  of  it  has  been  clearly  and 
explicitly  rendered.  This  power,  thus  asserted,  exercised,  and  maintained, 
in  favor  of  which  leading  politicians  in  South  Carolina  have  themselves 
voted,  is  alleged  to  furnish  "  an  extraordinary  case,"  where  the  powers  re- 
served to  the  States,  under  the  Constitution,  are  usurped  by  the  general 
government.  If  it  be,  there  is  scarcely  a  statute  in  our  code  which  would 
not  present  a  case  equally  extraordinary,  justifying  South  Carolina  or  any 
other  State  to  nullify  it. 

The  United  States  are  not  only  threatened  with  the  nullification  of  nu- 
merous acts,  which  they  have  deliberately  passed,  but  with  a  withdrawal 
of  one  of  the  members  from  the  confederacy.  If  the  unhappy  case  should 
ever  occur,  of  a  State  being  really  desirous  to  separate  itself  from  the 
Union,  it  would  present  two  questions.  The  first  would  be,  whether  it  had 
a  right  to  withdraw,  without  the  common  consent  of  the  members;  and, 
supposing,  as  I  believe,  no  such  right  to  exist,  whether  it  would  be  expedient 
to  yield  conseut.  Although  there  may  be  power  to  prevent  a  secession,  it 
might  be  deemed  politic  to  allow  it.  It  might  be  considered  expedient  to 
permit  the  refractory  State  to  take  the  portion  of  goods  that  falleth  to  her, 
to  suffer  her  to  gather  her  all  together,  and  to  go  off  with  her  living.  But, 
if  a  State  should  be  willing,  and  allowed  thus  to  depart,  and  to  renounce  her 
future  portion  of  the  inheritance  of  this  great,  glorious,  and  prosperous  re- 
public, she  would  speedily  return,  and,  in  language  of  repentance,  say  to 
the  other  members  of  this  Union,  "  Brethren,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven 
and  before  thee."  Whether  they  would  kill  the  fatted  calf,  and,  chiding 
any  containing  member  of  the  family,  say,  "This  thy  sister  was  dead,  and 
is  alive  again;  and  was  lost,  and  is  found,"  I  sincerely  pray  the  historian 
may  never  have  occasion  to  record. 

But  nullification  and  disunion  are  not  the  only  nor  the  most  formidable 
means  of  assailing  the  tariff.  Its  opponents  opened  the  campaign  at  the 
last  session  of  Congress,  and,  with  the  most  obliging  frankness,  have  since 
publicly  exposed  their  plan  of  operations.  It  is,  to  divide  and  conquer ; 
to  attack  and  subdue  the  system  in  detail.     They  began  by  reducing  the 


ON   NULLIFICATION   AND   OTHER   TOPICS.  407 

duty  on  salt  and  molasses,  and,  restoring  the  drawback  of  the  duty  on  the 
latter  article,  allowed  the  exportation  of  spirits  distilled  from  it.  To  all 
who  are  interested  in  the  distillation  of  spirits  from  native  materials^ 
whether  fruit,  molasses,  or  grain,  this  latter  measure  is  particularly  inju- 
rious. During  the  administration  of  Mr.  Adams,  the  duty  on  foreign  mo- 
lasses was  augmented,  and  the  drawback,  which  had  been  previously  al- 
lowed of  the  duty  upon  the  exportation  of  spirits  distilled  from  it,  was 
repealed.  The  object  was  to  favor  native  produce,  and  to  lessen  the  compe 
tition  of  foreign  spirits,  or  spirits  distilled  from  foreign  materials,  with  spirits 
distilled  from  domestic  materials.  It  was  deemed  to  be  especially  advanta- 
geous to  the  western  country,  a  great  part  of  whose  grain  can  only  find 
markets  at  home  and  abroad  by  being  converted  into  distilled  spirits. 
Encouraged  by  this  partial  success,  the  foes  of  the  tariff  may  next  attempt 
to  reduce  the  duties  on  iron,  woolens,  and  cotton  fabrics,  successively. 
The  American  system  of  protection  should  be  regarded,  as  it  is,  an  entire 
and  comprehensive  system,  made  up  of  various  items,  and  aiming  at  the 
prosperity  of  the  whole  Union,  by  protecting  the  interests  of  each  part. 
Every  part,  therefore,  has  a  direct  interest  in  the  protection  which  it  enjoys 
of  the  articles  which  its  agriculture  produces,  or  its  manufactories  fabri- 
cate, and  also  a  collateral  interest  in  the  protection  which  other  portions 
of  the  Union  derive  from  their  peculiar  interests.  Thus,  the  aggregate 
of  the  prosperity  of  all  is  constituted  by  the  sums  of  the  prosperity  of  each. 

Take  any  one  article  of  the  tariff  (iron,  for  example),  and  there  is  no 
such  direct  interest  in  its  protection,  pervading  the  major  part  of  the 
United  States,  as  would  induce  Congress  to  encourage  it,  if  it  stood  alone. 
The  States  of  Pennsylvania,  New  Jersey,  New  York,  and  Kentucky,  which 
are  most  concerned,  are  encouraged  in  the  production  or  manufacture  of 
this  article,  in  consequence  of  the  adoption  of  a  general  principle,  which 
extends  protection  to  other  interests  in  other  parts  of  the  Union. 

The  stratagem  which  has  been  adopted  by  the  foes  of  the  system,  to  de- 
stroy it,  requires  the  exercise  of  constant  vigilance  and  firmness,  to  prevent 
the  accomplishment  of  the  object.  They  have  resolved  to  divide  and  con- 
quer— the  friends  of  the  system  should  assume  the  revolutionury  motto  of 
our  ancestors,  "united  we  stand,  divided  we  fall."  They  should  allow  no 
alteration  in  any  part  of  the  system,  as  it  now  exists,  which  did  not  aim  at 
rendering  more  efficacious  the  system  of  protection,  on  which  the  whole  is 
founded.  Every  one  should  reflect,  that  it  is  not  equal,  to  have  a  particu- 
lar interest  which  he  is  desirous  should  be  fostered,  in  his  part  of  the 
country,  protected  against  foreign  competition,  without  his  being  willing  to 
extend  the  principle  to  other  interests,  deserving  protection,  in  other  parts 
of  the  Union. 

But  the  measure  of  reducing  the  duty  on  salt  and  molasses,  and  reviving 
the  drawback  on  the  importation  of  spirits  distilled  from  molasses,  was  an 
attack  on  the  system,  less  alarming  than  another  which  was  made  during 
the  last  session  of  Congress,  ou  a  kindred  system. 


408  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

If  any  thing  could  be  considered  as  settled,  under  the  present  Constitu- 
tion of  our  government,  I  had  supposed  that  it  was  its  authority  to  con- 
struct such  internal  improvements  as  may  be  deemed  by  Congress  neces- 
sary and  proper  to  carry  into  effect  the  power  granted  to  it.  For  nearly 
twenty -five  years,  the  power  has  been  asserted  and  exercised  by  the  gov- 
ernment. For  the  last  fifteen  years  it  has  been  often  controverted  in  Con- 
gress, but  it  has  been  invariably  maintained,  in  that  body,  by  repeated  de- 
cisions, pronounced  after  full  and  elaborate  debate,  and  at  intervals  of  time 
implying  the  greatest  deliberation.  Numerous  laws  attest  the  existence 
of  the  power  ;  and  no  less  than  twenty-odd  laws  have  been  passed  in  rela- 
tion to  a  single  work.  This  power,  necessary  to  all  parts  of  the  Union,  is 
indispensable  to  the  West.  Without  it,  this  section  can  never  enjoy  any 
part  of  the  benefit  of  a  regular  disbursement  of  the  vast  revenues  of  the 
United  States.  I  recollect  perfectly  well,  that,  at  the  last  great  struggle 
for  the  power,  in  1824,  Mr.  P.  P.  Barbour,  of  Virginia,  the  principal  cham- 
pion against  it,  observed  to  me,  that  if  it  were  affirmed  on  that  occasion 
(Mr.  Hemphill's  survey  bill),  he  should  consider  the  question  settled.  And 
it  was  affirmed. 

Yet  we  are  told  that  this  power  can  no  longer  be  exercised  without  an 
amendment  of  the  Constitution.  On  the  occasion  in  South  Carolina,  to 
which  I  have  already  adverted,  it  was  said,  that  the  tariff  and  internal  im- 
provements are  intimately  connected,  and  that  the  death-blow  which  it 
was  hoped  the  one  had  received,  will  finally  destroy  the  other.  I  concur  in 
the  opinion,  that  they  are  intimately,  if  not  indissolubly,  united.  Not  con- 
nected together,  with  the  fraudulent  intent  which  has  been  imputed,  but 
by  their  nature,  by  the  tendency  of  each  to  advance  the  objects  of  the 
other,  and  of  both  to  augment  the  sum  of  national  prosperity. 

If  I  could  believe  that  the  executive  message,  which  was  communicated 
to  Congress  upon  the  application  of  the  veto  to  the  Maysville  road,  really 
expressed  the  opinion  of  the  President  of  the  United  States,  in  consequence 
of  the  unfortunate  relations  which  have  existed  between  us,  I  would  for- 
bear to  make  any  observation  upon  it.  It  has  his  name  affixed  to  it ;  but 
it  is  not  every  paper  which  bears  the  name  of  a  distinguished  personage, 
that  is  his,  or  expresses  his  opinions.  We  have  been  lately  informed,  that 
the  unhappy  king  of  England,  in  perhaps  his  last  illness,  transmitted  a 
paper  to  Parliament,  with  his  royal  signature  attached  to  it,  which  became 
an  object  of  great  'curiosity.  Can  any  one  believe,  that  that  paper  convey- 
ed any  other  sentiments  than  those  of  his  majesty's  ministers  ?  It  is  im- 
possible, that  the  veto  message  should  express  the  opinions  of  the  president, 
and  I  prove  it  by  evidence  derived  from  himself.  Not  forty  days  before 
that  message  was  sent  to  Congress,  he  approved  a  bill  embracing  appro- 
priations to  various  objects  of  internal  improvement,  and  among  others,  to 
improve  the  navigation  of  Conneaut  creek.  Although  somewhat  acquaint- 
ed with  the  geography  of  our  country,  I  declare,  I  did  not  know  of  the  ex- 
istence of  such  a  stream  until  I  read  the  bill.     I  have  since  made  it  an 


ON   NULLIFICATION    AND    OTHER    TOPICS.  409 

object  of  inquiry,  and  Lave  been  told,  that  it  rises  in  one  comer  of  Penn- 
sylvania, and  is  discharged  into  Lake  Erie,  in  a  corner  of  the  State  of  Ohio; 
and  that  the  utmost  extent  to  Avhich  its  naviga'.ion  is  susceptible  of  im- 
provement, is  about  seven  miles.  Is  it  possible  that  the  president  could 
conceive  that  a  national  object,  and  that  the  improvement  of  a  great 
thoroughfare,  on  which  the  mail  is  transported  for  some  eight  or  ten 
States  and  Territories,  is  not  a  national  consideration  ?  The  power  to  im- 
prove the  navigation  of  watercourses,  nowhere  expressly  recognized  in  the 
Constitution,  is  infinitely  more  doubtful  than  the  establishment  of  mail 
roads,  which  is  explicitly  authorized  in  that  instrument !  Did  not  the 
president,  during  the  canvass  which  preceded  his  election,  in  his  answer  to 
a  letter  from  Governor  Ray,  of  Indiana,  written  at  the  instance  of  the 
Senate  of  that  respectable  State,  expressly  refer  to  his  votes  given  in  the 
Senate  of  the  United  States,  for  his  opinion  as  to  the  power  of  the  general 
government,  and  inform  him  that  his  opinion  remained  unaltered  ?  And 
do  we  not  find,  upon  consulting  the  journals  of  the  Senate,  that  amoug 
other  votes  affirming  the  existence  of  the  power,  he  voted  for  an  appropri- 
ation to  the  Chesapeake  and  Delaware  canal,  which  is  only  about  fourteen 
miles  in  extent  ?  And  do  we  not  know,  that  it  was  at  that  time,  like  the 
Maysville  road  now,  in  progress  of  execution  under  the  direction  of  a  com- 
pany incorporated  by  a  State  ?  And  that,  while  the  Maysville  road  had  a 
connection  with  roads  east  of  Maysville  and  south-west  of  Lexington,  the 
turnpiking  of  which  was  contemplated,  that  canal  had  no  connection  with 
any  other  existing  canal  ? 

The  veto  message  is  perfectly  irreconcilable  with  the  previous  acts,  votes, 
and  opinions,  of  General  Jackson.  It  does  not  express  his  opinions,  but 
those  of  his  advisers  and  counselors,  and  especially  those  of  his  cabinet. 
If  we  look  at  the  composition  of  that  cabinet,  we  can  not  doubt  it.  Three 
of  the  five,  who,  I  believe,  compose  it  (whether  the  postmaster-general  be 
one  or  not,  I  do  not  know),  are  known  to  be  directly  and  positively  op- 
posed to  the  power ;  a  fourth,  to  use  a  term  descriptive  of  the  favorite 
policy  of  one  of  them,  is  a  non-committal,  and  as  to  the  fifth,  good  Lord 
deliver  us  from  such  friendship  as  his  to  internal  improvements  !  Further, 
I  have  heard  it  from  good  authority  (but  I  will  not  vouch  for  it,  although 
I  believe  it  to  be  true),  that  some  of  the  gentlemen  from  the  South  waited 
upon  the  president,  while  he  held  the  Maysville  bill  under  consideration, 
and  told  him  if  he  approved  of  that  bill,  the  South  would  no  longer  ap- 
prove of  him,  but  oppose  his  administration. 

I  can  not,  therefore,  consider  the  message  as  conveying  the  sentiments 
and  views  of  the  president.  It  is  impossible.  It  is  the  work  of  his  cab- 
inet ;  and  if,  unfortunately,  they  were  not  practically  irresponsible  to  the 
people  of  the  United  States,  they  would  deserve  severe  animadversion  for 
having  prevailed  upon  the  president,  in  the  precipitation  of  business,  and 
perhaps  without  his  spectacles,  to  put  his  name  to  such  a  paper,  and  send 
it  forth  to  Congress  and  to  the  nation.   Why,  I  have  read  that  paper  again 


410  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

and  again ;  and  I  never  can  peruse  it  without  thinking  of  diplomacy,  and 
the  name  of  Talleyrand,  Talleyrand,  Talleyrand,  perpetually  recurring.  It 
seems  to  have  heen  written  in  the  spirit  of  an  accommodating  soul,  who, 
being  determined  to  have  fair  weather  in  any  contingency,  was  equally 
ready  to  cry  out,  good  Lord,  good  devil.  Are  you  for  internal  improve- 
ments ?  you  may  extract  from  the  message  texts  enough  to  support  your 
opinion.  Are  you  against  them  ?  the  message  supplies  you  with  abundant 
authority  to  countenance  your  views.  Do  you  think  that  a  long  and  un- 
interrupted current  of  concurring  decisions  ought  to  settle  the  question  of 
a  controverted  power  ?  so  the  authors  of  the  message  affect  to  be- 
lieve. But  ought  any  precedents,  however  numerous,  to  be  allowed 
to  establish  a  doubtful  power  ?  the  message  agrees  with  him  who  thinks 
not. 

I  can  not  read  this  singular  document  without  thinking  of  Talleyrand. 
That  remarkable  person  was  one  of  the  most  eminent  and  fortunate  men 
of  the  French  Revolution.  Prior  to  its  commencement,  he  held  a  bishop- 
ric under  the  ill-fated  Louis  the  Sixteenth.  When  that  great  political 
storm  showed  itself  above  the  horizon,  he  saw  which  way  the  wind  was 
going  to  blow,  and  trimmed  his  sails  accordingly.  He  was  in  the  majority 
of  the  Convention,  of  the  National  Assembly,  and  of  the  party  that  sustained 
the  bloody  Robespierre  and  his  cut-throat  successor.  He  belonged  to  the 
party  of  the  consuls,  the  consul  for  life,  and  finally  the  emperor.  What- 
ever party  was  uppermost,  you  would  see  the  head  of  Talleyrand  always 
high  among  them,  never  down.  Like  a  certain  dexterous  animal,  throw 
him  as  you  please,  head  or  tail,  back  or  belly  uppermost,  he  is  always  sure 
to  light  upon  his  feet.  During  a  great  part  of  the  period  described,  he 
was  minister  of  foreign  affairs,  and  although  totally  devoid  of  all  principle, 
no  man  ever  surpassed  him  in  the  adroitness  of  his  diplomatic  notes.  He 
is  now,  at  an  advanced  age,  I  believe,  grand  chamberlain  of  his  majesty, 
Charles  the  Tenth. 

I  have  lately  seen  an  amusing  anecdote  of  this  celebrated  man,  which 
forces  itself  upon  me  whenever  I  look  at  the  cabinet  message.  The  king 
of  France,  like  our  president,  toward  the  close  of  the  last  session  of  Con- 
gress, found  himself  in  a  minority.  A  question  arose,  whether,  in  conse- 
quence, he  should  dissolve  the  Chamber  of  Deputies,  which  resembles  our 
House  of  Representatives.  All  France  was  agitated  with  the  question. 
No  one  could  solve  it.  At  length,  they  concluded  to  go  to  that  sagacious, 
cunning  old  fox,  Talleyrand,  to  let  them  know  what  should  be  done.  I 
tell  you  what,  gentlemen,  said  he  (looking  very  gravely,  and  taking  a  pinch 
of  snuff),  in  the  morning  I  think  his  majesty  will  dissolve  the  Deputies ; 
at  noon  I  have  changed  that  opinion  ;  and  at  night  I  have  no  opinion  at 
all.  Now,  on  reading  the  first  column  of  this  message,  one  thinks  that 
the  cabinet  have  a  sort  of  an  opinion  in  favor  of  internal  improvements, 
with  some  limitations.  By  the  time  he  has  read  to  the  middle  of  it,  he 
concludes  they  have  adopted  the  opposite  opinion ;  and  when  he  gets  to 


ON  NULLIFICATION   AND   OTHER   TOPICS.  411 

the  end  of  it,  he  is  perfectly  persuaded,  they  have  no  opinion  of  their  own 
"whatever ! 

Let  us  glance  at  a  few  only  of  the  reasons,  if  reasons  they  can  be 
called,  of  this  piebald  message.  The  first  is,  that  the  exercise  of  the  power 
has  produced  discord,  and,  to  restore  harmony  to  the  national  councils,  it 
should  be  abandoned,  or,  which  is  tantamount,  the  Constitution  must  be 
amended.  The  president  is  therefore  advised  to  throw  himself  into  the 
minority.  Well — did  that  revive  harmony  ?  When  the  question  was 
taken  in  the  House  of  the  people's  representatives,  an  obstinate  majority 
still  voted  for  the  bill,  the  objections  in  the  message  notwithstanding.  And 
in  the  Senate,  the  representatives  of  the  States,  a  refractory  majority,  stood 
unmoved.  But  does  the  message  mean  to  assert,  that  no  great  measure, 
about  which  public  sentiment  is  much  divided,  ought  to  be  adopted  in  con- 
sequence of  that  division  ?  Then  none  can  ever  be  adopted.  Apply  this 
new  rule  to  the  case  of  the  American  Revolution.  The  colonies  were  rent 
into  implacable  parties — the  tories  everywhere  abounded,  and  in  some 
places  outnumbered  the  whigs.  This  continued  to  be  the  state  of  things 
throughout  the  revolutionary  contest.  Suppose  some  timid,  time-serving 
whig  had,  during  its  progress,  addressed  the  public,  and,  adverting  to  the 
discord  which  prevailed,  and  the  expediency  of  restoring  harmony  in  the 
land,  had  proposed  to  abandon  or  postpone  the  establishment  of  our  liberty 
and  independence,  until  all  should  agree  in  asserting  them  ?  The  late  war 
was  opposed  by  a  powerful  and  talented  party ;  what  would  have  been 
thought  of  president  Madison,  if,  instead  of  a  patriotic  and  energetic  mes- 
sage, recommending  it,  as  the  only  alternative,  to  preserve  our  honor  and 
vindicate  our  right,  he  had  come  to  Congress  with  a  proposal  that  we 
should  continue  to  submit  to  the  wrongs  and  degradation  inflicted  upon 
our  country  by  a  foreign  power,  because  we  were,  unhappily,  greatly 
divided  ?  What  would  have  become  of  the  settlement  of  the  Missouri 
question,  the  tariff,  the  Indian  bill  of  the  last  session,  if  the  existence  of  a 
strong  and  almost  equal  division  in  the  public  councils  ought  to  have  pre- 
vented their  adoption  ?  The  principle  is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  a 
declaration,  that  the  right  of  the  majority  to  govern,  must  yield  to  the 
perseverance,  respectability,  aud  numbers  of  the  minority.  It  is  in  keep- 
ing with  the  nullifying  doctrines  of  South  Carolina,  and  is  such  a  principle 
as  might  be  expected  to  be  put  forth  by  such  a  cabinet.  The  government 
of  the  United  States,  at  this  juncture,  exhibits  a  most  remarkable  spectacle. 
It  is  that  of  a  majority  of  the  nation  having  put  the  powers  of  govern- 
ment into  the  hands  of  the  minority.  If  any  one  can  doubt  this,  let  him 
look  back  at  the  elements  of  the  executive,  at  the  presiding  officers  of  the 
two  Houses,  at  the  composition  and  the  chairmen  of  the  most  important 
committees,  who  shape  and  direct  the  public  business  in  Congress.  Let 
him  look,  above  all,  at  measures,  the  necessary  consequences  of  such  an 
anomalous  state  of  things — internal  improvements  gone,  or  going ;  the 
whole  American  system  threatened,  and  the  triumphant  shouts  of  antici* 


412  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

pated  victory  sounding  in  our  ears.  Georgia,  extorting  from  the  fears  of 
an  affrighted  majority  of  Congress  an  Indian  bill,  which  may  prostrate  all 
the  laws,  treaties,  and  policy  which  have  regulated  our  relations  with  the 
Indians  from  the  commencement  of  our  government ;  and  politicians  in 
South  Carolina,  at  the  same  time,  brandishing  the  torch  of  civil  war,  and 
pronouncing  unbounded  eulogiums  upon  the  president,  for  the  good  he  has 
done,  and  the  still  greater  good  which  they  expect  at  his  hands,  and  the 
sacrifice  of  the  interests  of  the  majority. 

Another  reason  assigned  in  the  Maysville  message  is,  the  desire  of  pay- 
ing the  national  debt.  By  an  act  passed  in  the  year  1817,  an  annual  ap- 
propriation was  made  of  ten  millions  of  dollars,  which  were  vested  in  the 
commissioners  of  the  sinking  fund,  to  pay  the  principal  and  interest  of  the 
public  debt.  That  act  svas  prepared  and  carried  through  Congress  by  one 
of  the  most  estimable  and  enlightened  men  that  this  country  ever  pro- 
duced, whose  premature  death  is  to  be  lamented  on  every  account,  but  es- 
pecially because,  if  he  were  now  living,  he  would  be  able,  more  than  any 
other  man,  to  check  the  extravagance  and  calm  the  violence  raging  in 
South  Carolina,  his  native  State.  Under  the  operation  of  that  act,  nearly 
one  hundred  and  fifty  millions  of  the  principal  and  interest  of  the  public 
debt  were  paid,  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  present  administration. 
During  that  of  Mr.  Adams,  between  forty  and  fifty  were  paid,  while  larger 
appropriations  of  money  and  land  were  made,  to  objects  of  internal  im- 
provement, than  ever  had  been  made  by  all  preceding  administrations  to- 
gether. There  only  remained  about  fifty  millions  to  be  paid,  when 
the  present  chief  magistrate  entered  on  the  duties  of  that  office,  and  a  con- 
siderable portion  of  that  can  not  be  discharged  during  the  present  official 
term. 

The  redemption  of  the  debt  is,  therefore,  the  work  of  Congress ;  the 
president  has  nothing  to  do  with  it,  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  being 
directed  annually  to  pay  the  ten  millions  to  the  commissioners  of  the  sink- 
ing fund,  whose  duty  it  is  to  apply  the  amount  to  the  extinguishment  of 
the  debt.  The  secretary  himself  has  no  more  to  do  with  the  operation, 
than  the  hydrants  through  which  the  water  passes  to  the  consumption  of 
the  population  of  this  city.  He  turns  the  cock  on  the  first  of  January, 
and  the  first  of  July,  in  each  year,  and  the  public  treasure  is  poured  out 
to  the  public  creditor  from  the  reservoir,  filled  by  the  wisdom  of  Congress. 
It  is  evident,  from  this  just  view  of  the  matter,  that  Congress,  to  which 
belongs  the  care  of  providing  the  ways  and  means,  was  as  competent  as 
the  president  to  determine  what  portion  of  their  constituents'  money  could 
be  applied  to  the  improvement  of  their  condition.  As  much  of  the  public 
debt  as  can  be  paid,  will  be  discharged  in  four  years  by  the  operation  of 
the  sinking  fund.  I  have  seen,  in  some  late  paper,  a  calculation  of  the  de- 
lay which  would  have  resulted,  in  its  payment,  from  the  appropriation  to 
the  Maysville  road,  and  it  was  less  than  one  week  !  How  has  it  happened, 
that,  under  the  administration  of  Mr.  Adams,  and  during  every  year  of  it, 


ON    NULLIFICATION    AND    OTHER   TOPICS.  413 

such  large  and  liberal  appropriations  could  be  made  for  internal  improve- 
ments, without  touching  the  fund  devoted  to  the  public  debt,  and  that  this 
administration  should  find  itself  baulked  in  its  first  year  ? 

The  veto  message  proceeds  to  insist,  that  the  Maysville  and  Lexington 
road  is  not  a  national  but  a  local  road,  of  sixty  miles  in  length,  and  con- 
fined within  the  limits  of  a  particular  State.  If,  as  that  document  also  as- 
serts, the  power  can,  in  no  case,  be  exercised  until  it  shall  have  been  ex- 
plained and  defined  by  an  amendment  of  the  Constitution,  the  discrimina- 
tion of  national  and  local  roads,  would  seem  to  be  altogether  unnecessary. 
What  is  or  is  not  a  national  road,  the  message  supposes  may  admit  of 
controversy,  and  is  not  susceptible  of  precise  definition.  The  difficulty 
which  its  authors  imagine,  grows  out  of  their  attempt  to  substitute  a  rule 
founded  upon  the  extent  and  locality  of  the  road,  instead  of  the  use  and 
purposes  to  which  it  is  applicable.  If  the  road  facilitates,  in  a  considerable 
degree,  the  transportation  of  the  mail  to  a  considerable  portion  of  the 
Union,  and  at  the  same  time  promotes  internal  commerce  among  several 
States,  and  may  tend  to  accelerate  the  movement  of  armies,  and  the  distri- 
bution of  the  munitions  of  war,  it  is  of  national  consideration.  Tested  by 
this,  the  true  rule,  the  Maysville  road  was  undoubtedly  national.  It  con- 
nects the  largest  body,  perhaps,  of  fertile  land  in  the  Union,  with  the  navi- 
gation of  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  rivers,  and  with  the  canals  of  the  States 
of  Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  and  New  York.  It  begins  on  the  line  which 
divides  the  States  of  Ohio  and  Kentucky,  and,  of  course,  quickens  trade 
and  intercourse  between  them.  Tested  by  the  character  of  other  works, 
for  which  the  president,  as  a  senator,  voted,  or  which  were  approved  by 
him  only  about  a  month  before  he  rejected  the  Maysville  bill,  the  road 
was  undoubtedly  national. 

But  this  view  of  the  matter,  however  satisfactory  it  ought  to  be,  is  im- 
perfect. It  will  be  admitted  that  the  Cumberland  road  is  national.  It  is 
completed  no  further  than  Zanesville,  in  the  State  of  Ohio.  On  reaching 
that  point  two  routes  present  themselves  for  its  further  extension,  both 
national,  and  both  deserving  of  execution.  One  leading  northwestwardly, 
through  the  States  of  Ohio,  Indiana,  and  Illinois,  to  Missouri,  and  the 
other  south- westwardly,  through  the  States  of  Ohio,  Kentucky,  Tennessee, 
and  Alabama,  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  Both  have  been  long  contemplated. 
Of  the  two,  the  south-western  is  the  most  wanted,  in  the  present  state  of 
population,  and  will  probably  always  be  of  the  greatest  use.  But  the 
north-western  route  is  in  process  of  execution  beyond  Zanesville,  and  ap- 
propriations toward  part  of  it  were  sanctioned  by  the  president  at  the  last 
session.  National  highways  can  only  be  executed  in  sections,  at  different  ■ 
times.  So  the  Cumberland  road  was  and  continues  to  be  constructed.  Of 
all  the  parts  of  the  south-western  route,  the  road  from  Maysville  to  Lexing- 
ton is  most  needed,  whether  we  regard  the  amount  of  transportation  and 
traveling  upon  it,  or  the  impediments  which  it  presents  in  the  winter  and 


414  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

spring  months.     It  took  my  family  four  days  to  reach  Lexington  from 
Maysville,  in  April,  1829. 

The  same  scheme  which  has  heen  devised  and  practiced  to  defeat  the 
tariff,  has  been  adopted  to  undermine  internal  improvements.  They  are  to 
be  attacked  in  detail.  Hence  the  rejection  of  the  Maysville  road,  the 
Fredei  ictown  road,  and  the  Louisville  canal.  But  is  this  fair  ?  Ought 
each  proposed  road  to  be  viewed  separately  and  detached  ?  Ought  it  not 
to  be  considered  in  connection  with  other  great  works  which  are  in  pro- 
cess of  execution,  or  are  projected  ?  The  policy  of  the  foes  indicates  what 
ought  to  be  the  policy  of  the  friends  of  the  power. 

The  blow  aimed  at  internal  improvements  has  fallen  with  unmerited 
severity  upon  the  State  of  Kentucky.  No  State  in  the  Union  has  ever 
shown  more  generous  devotion  to  its  preservation  and  to  the  support  of  its 
honor  and  its  interest  than  she  has.  During  the  late  war,  her  sous  fought 
gallantly  by  the  side  of  the  president,  on  the  glorious  8th  of  January,  when 
he  covered  himself  with  unfading  laurels.  Wherever  the  war  raged,  they 
were  to  be  found  among  the  foremost  in  battle,  freely  bleeding  in  the  serv- 
ice of  their  country.  They  have  never  threatened  nor  calculated  the  value 
of  this  happy  Union.  Their  representatives  in  Congress  have  con  tantly 
and  almost  unanimously  supported  the  power,  cheerfully  voting  for  large 
appropriations  to  works  of  internal  improvements  in  other  States.  Not 
one  cent  of  the  common  treasure  has  been  expended  on  any  public  road  in 
that  State.  They  contributed  to  the  elevation  of  the  president,  under  a 
firm  conviction,  produced  by  his  deliberate  acts,  and  his  solemn  assertions, 
that  he  was  friendly  to  the  power.  Under  such  circumstances,  have  they 
not  just  and  abundant  cause  of  surprise,  regret,  and  mortification  at  the  late 
unexpected  decision  ? 

Another  mode  of  destroying  the  system,  about  which  I  fear  I  have  de- 
tained you  too  long,  which  its  foes  have  adopted,  is  to  assail  the  character 
of  its  friends.  Can  you  otherwise  account  for  this  spirit  of  animosity  with 
which  I  am  pursued  ?  A  sentiment  this  morning  caught  my  eye,  in  the 
shape  of  a  4th  of  July  toast,  proposed  at  the  celebration  of  that  anni- 
versary in  South  Carolina,  by  a  gentleman  whom  I  never  saw,  and  to 
whom  I  am  a  total  stranger.  With  humanity,  charity,  and  Christian  be- 
nevolence, unexampled,  he  wished  that  I  might  be  driven  so  far  beyond 
the  frigid  regions  of  the  northern  zone,  that  all  hell  could  not  thaw  me  ! 
Do  you  believe  it  was  against  me,  this  feeble  and  frail  form,  tottering  with 
ao-e,  this  lump  of  perishing  clay  that  all  this  kindness  was  directed  ?  No, 
no,  no.  It  was  against  the  measures  of  policy  which  I  have  espoused, 
against  the  system  which  1  have  labored  to  uphold,  that  it  was  aimed.  If 
I  had  been  opposed  to  the  tariff,  and  internal  improvements,  and  in  favor 
of  the  South  Carolina  doctrine  of  nullification,  the  same  worthy  gentleman 
would  have  wished  that  I  might  be  ever  fanned  by  soft  breezes,  charged 
with  aromatic  odors — that  ray  path  might  be  strewed  with  roses,  and  my 
abode  be  an  earthly  paradise.     I  am  now  a  private  man,  the  humblest  of 


ON   NULLIFICATION    AND    OTHER    TOPICS.  415 

the  humble,  possessed  of  no  office,  no  power,  no  patronage,  no  subsidized 
press,  no  post-office  department  to  distribute  its  effusions,  no  army,  no 
navy,  no  official  corps  to  chant  my  praises,  and  to  drink,  in  flowing  bowls, 
my  health  and  prosperity.  I  have  nothing  but  the  warm  affections  of  a 
portion  of  the  people,  and  a  fair  reputation,  the  only  inheritance  derived 
from  niy  father,  and  almost  the  only  inheritance  which  I  am  desirous  of 
transmitting  to  my  children. 

The  present  chief  magistrate  has  done  me  much  wrong,  but  I  have  freely 
forgiven  him.  He  believed,  no  doubt,  that  I  had  done  him  previous  wrong. 
Although  I  am  unconscious  of  it,  he  had  that  motive  for  his  conduct 
toward  me.  But  others  who  had  joined  in  the  hue  and  cry  against  me, 
had  no  such  pretext.  Why  then  am  I  thus  pursued,  my  words  perverted 
and  distorted,  my  acts  misrepresented?  "Why  do  more  than  a  hundred 
presses  daily  point  their  cannon  at  me,  and  thunder  forth  their  peals  of 
abuse  and  detraction  ?  It  is  not  against  me.  That  is  impossible.  A  few 
years  more,  and  this  body  will  be  where  all  is  still  and  silent.  It  is  against 
the  principles  of  civil  liberty,  against  the  tariff  and  internal  improvements,  to 
which  the  better  part  of  my  life  has  been  devoted,  that  this  implacable  war 
is  waged.  My  enemies  flatter  themselves,  that  those  systems  may  be  over- 
thrown by  my  destruction.  Vain  and  impotent  hope  !  My  existence  is 
not  of  the  smallest  consequence  to  their  preservation.  They  will  survive 
me.  Long,  long  after  I  am  gone,  while  the  lofty  hills  encompass  this  fair 
city,  the  offspring  of  those  measures  shall  remain  ;  while  the  beautiful 
river  that  sweeps  by  its  walls,  shall  continue  to  bear  upon  its  proud  bosom 
the  wonders  which  the  immortal  genius  of  Fulton,  with  the  blessings  of 
Providence,  has  given ;  while  truth  shall  hold  its  sway  among  men,  those 
systems  will  invigorate  the  industry,  and  animate  the  hopes,  of  the  farmer 
the  mechanic,  the  manufacturer,  and  all  other  classes  of  our  countrymen. 

People  of  Ohio  here  assembled — mothers — daughters — sons,  and  sires, 
when  reclining  on  the  peaceful  pillow  of  repose,  and  communing  with  your 
own  hearts,  ask  yourselves,  if  I  ought  to  be  the  unremitting  object  of  per- 
petual calumny.  If,  when  the  opponents  of  the  late  president  gained  the 
victory  on  the  4th  of  March,  1829,  the  war  ought  not  to  have  ceased, 
quarter  been  granted,  and  prisoners  released  ?  Did  not  those  opponents 
obtain  all  the  honors,  offices,  and  emoluments  of  government  ?  the  power, 
which  they  have  frequently  exercised,  of  rewarding  whom  they  pleased, 
and  punishing  whom  they  could  ?  Was  not  all  this  sufficient  ?  Does  it 
all  avail  not,  while  Mordecai,  the  Jew,  stands  at  the  king's  gate  ? 

I  thank  you,  fellow-citizens,  again  and  again,  for  the  numerous  proofs 
you  have  given  me  of  your  attachment  and  confidence.  And  may  your 
fine  city  continue  to  enjoy  the  advantages  of  the  enterprise,  industry,  and 
public  spirit  of  its  mechanics  and  other  inhabitants,  until  it  rises  in  wealth, 
extent,  and  prosperity,  with  the  largest  of  our  Atlantic  capitals. 


REDUCTION  OF  DUTIES   ON  IMPORTS. 

IN  THE  SENATE  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES,  JANUARY  11,  1832. 

[We  find  Mr.  Clay  again  in  Congress,  and  in  the  Senate. 
One  of  the  strongest  motives  for  going  there  was,  doubtless,  to 
save  his  American  System  from  being  damaged  by  rash  legisla- 
tion, to  which  it  was  exposed,  not  only  by  hostility  to  it  from 
the  South,  but  by  the  willingness  of  the  President  of  the  United 
States,  General  Jackson,  to  do  any  thing  that  would  annoy  Mr. 
Clay,  and  detract  from  his  fame.  The  American  System,  com- 
menced in  1824,  had  been  immensely  beneficial  to  the  country, 
was  well  appreciated  by  the  people,  and  Mr.  Clay  had  all  the 
credit  of  it.  This  great  fact  put  him  on  the  shoulders  of  the 
American  people,  and  they  would  throw  up  their  hats  for  him 
anywhere.  The  public  debt  had  been  rapidly  liquidated,  and  was 
now  reduced  to  the  small  item  of  twenty-four  millions,  most  of 
which  was  provided  for  the  ensuing  year.  It  was  clear  enough, 
therefore,  that  the  duties  on  imports,  which  were  the  chief 
source  of  revenue,  might  be  reduced,  and  that  this  measure  was 
called  for.  But  the  principle  of  reduction  was  the  great  ques- 
tion to  be  settled.  The  South — especially  South  Carolina — de- 
manded the  demolition  of  the  protective  system,  which,  for  the 
last  few  years,  had  been  the  cause  of  such  great  public  prosperity, 
and  which  Mr.  Clay  wished  to  preserve  in  such  a  degree  as  might 
be  necessary  for  the  required  revenue  and  the  continued  pros- 
perity of  the  country,  both  of  which  objects  a  proper  discrimi- 
nation in  the  reduction  of  duties  would  effectually  secure.  But 
there  was  the  eagle  eye  of  Mr.  Calhoun,  who  believed  that  the 
protective  system  was  injurious  to  the  South  ;  and  there  was  the 
envious  disposition  of  General  Jackson,  who  studied  to  impair 
the  popularity  of  Mr.  Clay.  These  were  potent  agencies  which 
Mr.  Clay  foresaw  would  be  brought  to  bear  on  his  American 
System,  and  if  possible  to  break  it  down.  In  anticipation  of 
these   demonstrations,   and   foreseeing  that  duties  on  imports 


ON   THE    REDUCTION    OF    DUTIES   ON   IMPORTS.  417 

must  be  reduced,  for  reasons  above  named,  he  introduced  into 
the  Senate  the  following  resolution  : 

"Kesolved,  that  the  existing  duties  upon  articles  imported  from  foreign  coun- 
tries, and  not  coming  into  competition  with  similar  articles  made  or  produced 
within  the  United  States,  ought  to  be  forthwith  abolished,  except  the  duties  up- 
on wines  and  silks,  and  that  those  ought  to  be  reduced.  And  that  the  commit- 
tee on  finance  be  instructed  to  report  a  bill  accordingly." 

This  resolution  he  supported  by  a  speech,  as  follows,  opening 
the  debate  on  the  great  question,  in  which  he  afterward  partici- 
pated in  an  argument  of  great  length  and  force,  as  we  shall  have 
occasion  to  see.] 

I  have  a  few  observations,  Mr.  President,  and  only  a  few,  to  submit 
to  the  Senate,  on  the  measure  now  before  you,  in  doing  which  I  Lave  to 
ask  all  your  indulgence.  I  am  getting  old  ;  I  feel  but  too  sensibly  and  un- 
affectedly the  effects  of  approaching  age,  and  I  have  been  for  some  years 
very  little  in  the  habit  of  addressing  deliberative  assemblies.  I  am  told 
that  I  have  been  the  cause — the  most  unwilling  cause,  if  I  have  been — of 
exciting  expectations,  the  evidence  of  which  is  around  us.  I  regret  it ;  for 
however  the  subject  on  which  I  am  to  speak,  in  other  hands,  might  be 
treated,  to  gratify  or  to  reward  the  presence  and  attention  now  given  in 
mine,  I  have  nothing  but  a  plain,  unvarnished,  and  unambitious  exposition 
to  make. 

It  forms  no  part  of  my  present  purpose  to  enter  into  a  consideration  of 
the  established  policy  of  protection.  Strong  in  the  convictions  and  deeply 
seated  in  the  affections  of  a  large  majority  of  the  people  of  the  United 
States,  it  stands  self-vindicated  in  the  general  prosperity,  in  the  rich  fruits 
which  it  has  scattered  over  the  land,  in  the  experience  of  all  prosperous  and 
powerful  nations,  present  and  past,  and  now  in  that  of  our  own.  Nor  do  I 
think  it  necessary  to  discuss  that  policy  on  this  resolution.  Other  gentle- 
men may  think  differently,  and  may  choose  to  argue  and  assail  it.  If  they 
do,  I  have  no  doubt  that  in  all  parts  of  the  Senate,  members  more  compe- 
tent than  I  am,  will  be  ready  to  support  and  defend  it.  My  object  now  is 
to  limit  myself  to  a  presentation  of  certain  views  and  principles  connected 
with  the  present  financial  condition  of  the  country. 

A  consideration  of  the  state  of  the  public  revenue  has  become  necessary 
in  consequence  of  the  near  approach  of  the  entire  extinction  of  the  public 
debt, ;  and  I  concur  with  you,  sir,  in  believing  that  no  season  could  be 
more  appropriate  than  the  present  session  of  Congress,  to  endeavor  to  make 
a  satisfactory  adjustment  of  the  tariff".  The  public  debt  chiefly  arose  out 
of  the  late  war,  justly  denominated  the  second  contest  for  national  inde- 
pendence. An  act,  commonly  called  the  sinking-fund  act,  was  passed  by 
Congress  nearly  fifteen  years  ago,  providing  for  its  reimbursement.  That 
act  was  prepared  by  a  friend  of  yours  and  mine,  and  proposed  by  him, 

27 


418  SPEECHES    OF    HENKY    CLAY. 

whose  premature  death  was  not  a  loss  merely  to  his  native  State,  of  which 
he  was  one  of  its  brightest  ornaments,  but  to  the  whole  nation.  No  man 
with  whom  I  ever  had  the  honor  to  be  associated  in  the  legislative  coun- 
cils, combined  more  extensive  and  useful  information,  with  more  firmness 
of  judgment,  and  blandness  of  manner,  than  did  the  lamented  Mr.  Lowndes. 
And  when  in  the  prime  of  life,  by  the  dispensation  of  an  all-wise  Provi- 
dence, he  was  taken  from  us,  his  country  had  reason  to  anticipate  the 
greatest  benefits  from  his  wisdom  and  discretion.  By  that  act  an  annual 
appropriation  was  made,  of  ten  millions  of  dollars,  toward  the  payment  of 
the  principal  and  interest  of  the  public  debt,  and  also  any  excess  which 
might  yearly  be  in  the  treasury,  beyond  two  millions  of  dollars,  which  it 
was  thought  prudent  to  reserve  for  unforeseen  exigences. 

But  this  system  of  regular  and  periodical  application  of  public  revenue 
to  the  payment  of  the  public  debt,  would  have  been  unavailing  if  Congress 
had  neglected  to  provide  the  necessary  ways  and  means.  Congress  did 
not,  however,  neglect  the  performance  of  that  duty.  By  various  acts,  and 
more  especially  by  the  tariff  of  1824 — the  abused  tariff  of  1824 — the 
public  coffers  were  amply  replenished,  and  we  have  been  enabled  to  reach 
our  present  proud  eminence  of  financial  prosperity.  After  Congress  had 
thus  abundantly  provided  funds,  and  directed  then"  systematical  application, 
the  duty  remaining  to  be  performed  by  the  executive  was  one  simply  min- 
isterial. And  no  executive,  and  no  administration,  can  justly  claim  for 
itself  any  other  merit  in  the  discharge  of  the  public  debt  than  that  of  a 
faithful  execution  of  the  laws ;  no  other  merit  than  that  similar  one  tb 
which  it  is  entitled,  for  directing  a  regular  payment  of  what  is  due  from 
time  to  time  to  the  army  and  navy,  or  to  the  officers  of  the  civil  govern- 
ment for  their  salaries. 

The  operation  of  the  sinking-fund  act  commenced  with  the  commence- 
ment of  Mr.  Monroe's  administration.  During  its  continuance,  of  eight 
years,  in  consequence  of  the  embarrassments  of  the  treasury,  the  ten 
millions  were  not  regularly  applied  to  the  payment  of  the  debt,  and  upon 
the  termination  of  that  administration  the  treasury  stood  largely  in  arrear 
to  the  sinking-fund.  During  the  subsequent  administration  of  four  years, 
not  only  were  the  ten  millions  faithfully  applied  during  each  year,  but 
those  arrears  were  brought  up,  and  all  previous  deficiences  made  good.  So 
that,  when  the  present  administration  began,  a  plain,  unincumbered,  and 
well-defined  path  lay  directly  before  it.  Under  the  measures  which  have 
been  devised  in  the  short  term  of  fifteen  years,  the  government  has  paid 
nearly  one  hundred  millions  of  principal,  and  about  an  equal  sum  of  in- 
terest, leaving  the  small  remnant  behind  of  twenty-four  millions.  Of  that 
amount,  thirteen  millions  consist  of  three  per  cent,  stock,  created  by  the 
act  of  1790,  which  the  government  does  not  stand  bound  to  redeem  at  any 
prescribed  time,  but  which  it  may  discharge  whenever  it  may  suit  its  own 
convenience,  and  when  it  is  discharged  it  must  be  done  by  the  payment  of 
dollar  for  dollar.     I  can  not  think,  and  I  should  suppose  Congress  can 


ON   THE   REDUCTION   OF   DUTIES   ON   IMPORTS.  419 

hardly  believe  -with  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  that  it  would  be  wise  to 
pay  off  a  stock  of  thirteen  millions,  entitling  its  holders  to  but  three  per 
cent.,  with  a  capital  of  thirteen  millions,  worth  an  interest  of  six  per  cent. 
In  other  words,  to  take  from  the  pockets  of  the  people  two  dollars,  to  pay 
one  in  the  hands  of  the  stockholder. 

The  moral  value  of  the  payment  of  a  national  debt  consists  in  the 
demonstration  which  it  affords  of  the  ability  of  a  country  to  meet,  and  its 
integrity  in  fulfilling,  all  its  engagements.  /  That  the  resources  of  this  coun- 
try, increasing,  as  it  constantly  is,  in  population  and  wealth,  are  abundantly 
sufficient  to  meet  any  debt,  which  it  may  ever  prudently  contract,  can  not 
be  doubted.  And  its  punctuality  and  probity,  from  the  period  of  the  as- 
sumption, in  1790,  of  the  debt  of  the  Revolution,  down  to  the  present 
time,  rest  upon  a  solid  and  incontestable  foundation.  The  danger  is  not, 
perhaps,  that  it  will  not  fairly  meet  its  engagements,  but  that,  from  an  in- 
ordinate avidity,  arising  from  temporary  causes,  it  may  bring  discredit 
upon  itself  by  improvident  arrangements,  which  no  prudent  man,  in  the 
management  of  his  private  affairs,  would  ever  think  of  adopting. 

Of  the  residue  of  that  twenty-four  millions  of  debt,  after  deducting  the 
thirteen  millions  of  three  per  cent.,  less  than  two  millions  are  due,  and  of 
right  payable  within  the  present  year.  If  to  that  sum  be  added  the  moiety 
which  becomes  due  on  the  31st  of  December  next,  of  the  four  million  four 
hundred  and  fifty-four  thousand  seven  hundred  and  twenty-seven  dollars, 
created  by  the  act  of  the  26th  of  May,  1824,  we  have  but  a  sum  of  about 
four  millions,  which  the  public  creditor  can  lawfully  demand,  or  wdiich  the 
government  is  bound  to  pay  in  the  course  of  this  year.  If  more  is  paid,  it 
can  only  be  done  by  anticipating  the  period  of  its  payment,  and  going  into 
the  public  market  to  purchase  the  stock.  Can  it  be  doubted  that,  if  you 
do  so,  the  vigilant  holder  of  the  stock,  taking  advantage  of  your  anxiety, 
will  demand  a  greater  price  than  its  value  ?  Already  we  perceive  that  the 
three  per  cent,  have  risen  to  the  extraordinary  height  of  ninety-six  per  cent. 
The  difference  between  a  j^ayment  of  the  inconsiderable  portion  remaining 
of  the  public  debt  in  one,  two,  or  three  years,  is  certainly  not  so  important 
as  to  justify  a  resort  to  highly  disadvantageous  terms. 
/  Whoever  may  be  entitled  to  the  credit  of  the  payment  of  the  public 
'  debt,  I  congratulate  you,  sir,  and  the  country,  most  cordially,  that  it  is  so  \ 
near  at  hand,  a  It  is  so  nearly  being  totally  extinguished,  that  we  may  now 
safely  inquire  whether,  without  prejudice  to  any  established  policy,  we 
may  not  relieve  the  consumption  of  the  country,  by  the  repeal  or  re- 
duction of  duties,  and  curtail  considerably  the  public  revenue.  In  making 
this  inquiry,  the  first  question  that  presents  itself  is,  whether  it  is  expedient 
to  preserve  the  existing  duties  in  order  to  accumulate  a  surplus  in  the 
treasury,  for  the  purpose  of  subsequent  distribution  among  the  several 
States.  I  think  not.  If  the  collection  for  the  purpose  of  such  a  surplus  is 
to  be  made  from  the  pockets  of  one  portion  of  the  people,  to  be  ultimately 
returned  to  the  same  pockets,  the  process  would  be  attended  with  the  cer- 


420  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

tain  loss  arising  from  the  charges  of  collection,  and  with  the  loss  also  of 
interest  while  the  money  is  performing  the  unnecessary  circuit,  and  it  would 
therefore  he  unwise.  If  it  is  to  be  collected  from  one  portion  of  the  peo- 
ple and  given  to  another,  it  would  be  unjust.  If  it  is  to  be  given  to  the 
States  in  their  corporate  capacity,  to  be  used  by  them  in  their  public  ex- 
penditure, I  know  of  no  principle  in  the  Constitution  that  authorizes  the 
federal  government  to  become  such  a  collector  for  the  States,  nor  of  any 
principle  of  safety  or  propriety  which  admits  of  the  States  becoming  such 
recipients  of  gratuity  from  the  general  government. 

The  public  revenue,  then,  should  be  regulated  and  adapted  to  the  proper 
service  of  the  general  government.  It  should  be  ample ;  for  a  deficit  in 
the  public  income,  always  to  be  deprecated,  is  sometimes  attended,  as  we 
know  well  from  history  and  from  what  has  happened  in  our  own  time,  with 
fatal  consequences.  In  a  country  so  rapidly  growing  as  this  is,  with  such 
diversified  interests,  new  wants  and  unexpected  calls  upon  the  public  treas- 
ury must  frequently  occur.  Take  some  examples  from  this  session.  The 
State  of  Virginia  has  presented  a  claim  for  an  amount  but  little  short  of  a 
million,  which  she  presses  with  an  earnestness  demonstrating  her  conviction 
of  its  justice.  The  State  of  South  Carolina  has  also  a  claim  for  no  incon- 
siderable sum,  being  upward  of  one  hundred  thousand  dollars,  which  she 
urges  with  equal  earnestness.  The  gentleman  from  Pennsylvam'a  (Mr. 
Wilkins)  has  brought  forward  a  claim  arising  out  of  French  spoliations 
previous  to  the  convention  of  1800,  which  is  perhaps  not  short  of  five  mil- 
lions, and  to  some  extent  I  have  no  doubt  it  has  a  just  foundation.  In  any 
provision  of  public  revenue,  Congress  ought  so  to  fix  as  to  admit  of  the 
payment  of  honest  and  proper  demands,  which  its  justice  can  not  reject  or 
evade. 

I  hope,  too,  that  either  in  the  adjustment  of  the  public  revenue,  or  what 
would  be  preferable,  in  the  appropriation  of  the  proceeds  of  the  public 
lands,  effectual  and  permanent  provision  will  be  made  for  such  internal 
improvements  as  may  be  sanctioned  by  Congress.  This  is  due  to  the 
American  people,  and  emphatically  due  to  the  western  people.  Sir,  tem- 
porary causes  may  exact  a  reluctant  acquiescence  from  the  people  of  the 
West  in  the  suspension  of  appropriations  to  objects  of  internal  improve- 
ment, but  as  certain  as  you  preside  in  that  chair,  or  as  the  sun  performs  its 
diurnal  revolution,  they  will  not  be  satisfied  with  an  abandonment  of  the 
policy.  They  will  come  here  and  tell  you,  not  in  a  tone  of  menace  or 
supplication,  but  in  the  language  of  conscious  right,  that  they  must  share 
with  you  in  the  benefits,  as  they  divide  with  you  the  burdens  and  the  per- 
ils, of  a  common  government.  They  will  say  that  they  have  no  direct  in- 
terest in  the  expenditures  for  the  navy,  the  fortifications,  nor  even  the  army, 
those  greatest  absorbents  of  the  public  treasure  ;  that  they  are  not  indiffer- 
ent, indeed,  to  the  safety  and  prosperity  of  any  part  of  our  common  coun- 
try. On  the  contrary,  that  every  portion  of  the  republic  is  indirectly,  at 
least,  interested  in  the  welfare  of  the  whole,  and  that  they  ever  sympathize 


ON   THE   EEDUCTION   OF    DUTIES   ON   IMPORTS.  421 

in  the  distresses  and  rejoice  in  the  happiness  of  the  most  distant  quarter  of 
the  Union.  And  to  demonstrate  that  they  are  not  careless  or  indifferent  to 
interests  not  directly  their  own,  they  may  proudly  and  triumphantly  ap- 
peal to  the  gallant  part  which  they  bore  in  the  late  war,  and  point  to  the 
bloody  fields  on  which  some  of  their  most  patriotic  sons  nobly  fell  fighting 
in  the  common  cause.  But  they  will  also  say,  that  these  paternal  and  just 
sentiments  ought  to  be  reciprocated  by  their  Atlantic  brethren ;  that  these 
ought  not  to  be  indifferent  to  the  welfare  of  the  West,  and  that  they  have 
the  same  collateral  or  indirect  interest  in  its  success  and  advancement  that 
the  West  has  in  theirs ;  that  it  does  not  ask  internal  improvements  to  be 
confined  exclusively  to  itself,  but  that  it  may  receive,  in  common  with  the 
rest  of  the  Union,  a  practical  benefit  in  the  only  form  compatible  with  its 
interior  condition. 

The  appropriation  of  the  proceeds  of  the  public  lands,  or  a  considerable 
portion  of  them,  to  that  object,  woidd  be  a  most  natural  and  suitable  dis- 
position. And  I  do  hope,  sir,  that  that  great  resource  will  be  cherished 
and  dedicated  to  some  national  purpose,  worthy  of  the  republic.  Utterly 
opposed  as  I  trust  Congress  will  show  itself  to  be,  to  all  the  mad  and  wild 
schemes — and  to  that  latest,  but  maddest  and  wildest  of  all,  recommended 
by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury — for  squandering  the  public  domain,  I 
hope  it  will  be  preserved  for  the  present  generation  and  for  posterity,  as  it 
has  been  received  from  our  ancestors,  a  rich  and  bountiful  inheritance.  In 
these  halcyon  days  of  peace  and  plenty  and  an  overflowing  treasury,  we 
appear  to  embarrass  ourselves  in  devising  visionary  schemes  for  casting 
away  the  bounties  with  which  the  goodness  of  Providence  has  blessed  us. 
But,  sir,  the  storm  of  war  will  come  when  we  know  not,  the  day  of  trial 
and  difficulty  will  assuredly  come,  and  now  is  the  time,  by  a  prudent  fore- 
cast, to  husband  our  resources,  and  this  the  greatest  of  them  all.  Let 
them  not  be  hoarded  and  hugged  with  a  miser's  embrace,  but  liberally  used. 
Let  the  public  lands  be  administered  in  a  generous  spirit ;  and  especially 
toward  the  States  within  which  they  are  situated.  Let  the  proceeds  of  the 
sales  of  the  public  lands  be  applied  in  a  season  of  peace  to  some  great  ob- 
ject, and  when  war  does  come,  by  suspending  that  application  of  them 
during  its  continuance,  you  will  be  at  once  put  in  possession  of  means  for 
its  vigorous  prosecution.  More  than  tweuty-five  years  ago,  when  first  I 
took  a  seat  in  this  body,  I  was  told  by  the  fathers  of  the  government,  that 
if  we  had  any  thing  perfect  in  our  institutions,  it  was  the  system  for  dis- 
posing of  the  public  lands,  and  I  was  cautioned  against  rash  innovations 
in  it.  Subsequent  experience  fully  satisfied  me  of  the  wisdom  of  their 
counsels,  and  that  all  vital  changes  in  it  ought  to  be  resisted. 

Although  it  may  be  impracticable  to  say  what  the  exact  amount  of  the 
public  revenue  should  be  for  the  future,  and  what  would  be  the  precise 
produce  of  any  given  system  of  imposts,  we  may  safely  assume  that  the 
revenue  may  now  be  reduced,  and  considerably  reduced.     This  reduction 


422  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY    CLAY. 

may  be  effected  in  various  ways,  and  on  different  principles.     Only  three 
modes  shall  now  be  noticed. 

First,  to  reduce  duties  on  all  articles  in  the  same  ratio,  without  regard  to 
the  principle  of  protection. 

Second,  to  retain  them  on  the  unprotected  articles,  and  augment  them 
on  the  protected  articles.     And, 

Third,  to  abolish  and  reduce  the  duties  on  unprotected  articles,  retaining 
and  enforcing  the  faithful  collection  of  those  on  the  protected  articles. 

To  the  first  mode  there  are  insuperable  objections.  It  would  lead  in- 
evitably to  the  destruction  of  our  home  manufactures.  It  would  establish 
a  sort  of  bed  of  Procrustes,  by  which  the  duties  on  all  articles  should  be 
blindly  measured,  without  respect  to  their  nature  or  the  extent  of  their 
consumption.  And  it  would  be  derogatory  to  every  principle  of  theory  or 
practice  on  which  the  government  has  hitherto  proceeded. 

The  second  would  be  still  more  objectionable  to  the  foes  of  the  tariff 
than  either  of  the  others.  But  it  can  not  be  controverted,  that,  by  aug- 
menting considerably  the  duties  on  the  protected  class,  so  as  to  carry  them 
to  the  point,  or  near  to  the  confines,  of  absolute  prohibition,  the  object  in 
view,  of  effecting  the  necessary  reduction  of  the  public  revenue,  may  be 
accomplished  without  touching  the  duties  on  the  unprotected  class.  The 
consequence  of  such  an  augmentation  would  be,  a  great  diminution  in  the 
importation  of  the  foregoing  article,  and  of  course  in  the  duties  upon  it. 
But  against  entire  prohibition,  except  perhaps  in  a  few  instances,  I  have 
been  always,  and  still  am,  opposed.  By  leaving  the  door  open  to  the  for- 
eign rival  article,  the  benefit  is  secured  of  a  salutary  competition.  If  it  be 
hermetically  closed,  the  danger  is  incurred  of  monopoly.  The  third  mode 
is  the  most  equitable  and  reasonable,  and  it  presents  an  undebatable 
ground,  on  which  I  had  hoped  we  all  could  safely  tread  without  difficulty. 
It  exacts  no  sacrifice  of  principle  from  the  opponent  of  the  American  sys- 
tem, it  comprehends  none  on  the  part  of  its  friends.  The  measure  before 
you  embraces  this  mode.  It  is  simple,  and  free  from  all  complexity.  It 
divides  the  whole  subject  of  imposts  according  to  its  nature.  It  settles  at 
once  what  ought  not  to  be  disputed,  and  leaves  to  be  settled  hereafter,  if 
necessary,  what  may  be  controverted. 

A  certain  part  of  the  South  has  hitherto  complained,  that  it  pays  a  dis- 
proportionate amount  of  the  imposts.  If  the  complaint  be  well  founded, 
by  the  adoption  of  this  measure  it  will  be  relieved  at  once,  as  will  be 
hereafter  shown,  from  at  least  a  fourth  of  its  burdens.  The  measure  is  in 
conformity  with  the  uniform  practice  of  the  government  from  its  com- 
mencement, and  with  the  professions  of  all  the  eminent  politicians  of  the 
South  until  of  late.  It  assumes  the  right  of  the  government,  in  the  as- 
sessment of  duties,  to  discriminate  between  those  articles  which  sound  pol- 
icy requires  it  to  foster  and  those  which  it  need  not  encourage.  This  has 
been  the  invarible  principle  on  which  the  government  has  proceeded,  from 
the  act  of   Congress  of   the  4th  of  July,   1789,  down   to  the  present 


ON   THE    REDUCTION    OF    DUTIES   ON    IMPORTS.  423 

time.  And  lias  it  not  been  admitted  by  almost  every  prominent  southern 
politician?  Has  it  not  even  been  acknowledged  by  the  fathers  of  the  free- 
trade  church,  in  their  late  address  promulgated  from  Philadelphia  to  the 
people  of  the  United  States  ?  If  we  never  had  a  system  of  foreign  im- 
posts, and  were  now  called  upon  for  the  first  time  to  originate  one,  should 
we  not  discriminate  between  the  objects  of  our  own  industry  and  those 
produced  by  foreigners  ?  And  is  there  any  difference  in  its  application 
between  the  modification  of  an  existing  system  and  the  origination  of  a 
new  one  ?  If  the  gentlemen  of  the  South,  opposed  to  the  tariff,  were  to 
obtain  complete  possession  of  the  powers  of  government,  would  they  hazard 
their  exercise  on  any  other  principle  ?  If  it  be  said  that  some  of  the  ar- 
ticles that  would  by  this  measure  be  liberated  from  duties,  are  luxuries, 
the  remark  is  equally  true  of  some  of  the  articles  remaining  subject  to 
duties.  In  the  present  advanced  stage  of  civilization  and  comfort,  it  is 
not  easy  to  draw  the  line  between  luxuries  and  necessaries.  It  will  be 
difficult  to  make  the  people  believe  that  bohea  tea  is  a  luxury,  and  the  ar- 
ticle of  fiue  broadcloth  is  a  necessary,  of  life. 

In  stating  that  the  duties  on  the  protected  class  ought  to  be  retained,  it 
has  been  far  from  my  wish  to  preclude  inquiry  into  their  adequacy  or 
propriety.  If  it  can  be  shown  that  in  any  instance  they  are  excessive  or 
disproportionately  burdensome  on  any  section  of  the  Union,  for  one,  I  am 
ready  to  vote  for  their  reduction,  or  modification.  The  system  contem- 
plates an  adequate  protection  ;  beyond  that,  it  is  not  necessary  to  go. 
Short  of  that,  its  operation  will  be  injurious  to  all  parties. 

The  people  of  this  country,  or  a  large  majority  of  them,  expect  that  the 
system  will  be  preserved.  And  its  abandonment  would  produce  general 
surprise,  spread  desolation  over  the  land,  and  occasion  as  great  a  shock  as 
a  declaration  of  war  forthwith  against  the  most  powerful  nation  of  Europe. 

But  if  the  system  be  preserved,  it  ought  to  be  honestly,  fairly,  and  faith- 
fully enforced.  That  there  do  exist  the  most  scandalous  violations  of  it, 
and  the  grossest  frauds  upon  the  public  revenue  in  regard  to  some  of  the 
most  important  articles,  can  not  be  doubted.  As  to  iron,  objects  really 
belonging  to  one  denomination  to  which  a  higher  duty  is  attached,  are  im- 
ported under  another  name,  to  which  a  lower  duty  is  assigned,  and  thus 
the  law  is  evaded.  False  invoices  are  made  as  to  woolens,  and  the  classi- 
fications into  minimums  is  constantly  eluded.  The  success  of  the  Amer- 
ican manufacture  of  cotton  bagging  has  been  such  that,  by  furnishing  a 
better  and  cheaper  article,  the  bagging  of  Inverness  and  Dundee  has  been 
almost  excluded  from  the  consumption  of  the  States  bordering  on  the  Mis- 
sissippi and  its  tributaries.  There  has  not  yet  been  sufficient  time  to  fab- 
ricate and  transport  the  article  in  necessary  quantities  from  the  western 
States  to  the  southern  Atlantic  States,  which  have  therefore  been  almost 
exclusively  supplied  from  the  Scottish  manufactories.  The  pa}rment  of 
the  duty  is  evaded  by  the  introduction  of  the  foreign  fabric,  under  the 
name  of  burlops,  or  some  other  mercantile  phrase,  and  instead  of  paying 


424  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

five  cents  the  square  yard,  it  is  entered  with  a  duty  of  only  fifteen  per  cen- 
tum ad  valorem.  That  this  practice  prevails,  is  demonstrated  hy  the  treas- 
ury report  of  the  duties  accruing  on  cotton  bagging  for  the  years  1828, 
1829-30.  During  the  first  year  the  amount  was  one  hundred  and  thirty- 
seven  thousand  five  hundred  and  six  dollars;  the  second,  one  hundred  and 
six  thousand  and  sixty-eight  dollars ;  and  the  third  it  sank  down  to  four- 
teen thousand  one  hundred  and  forty-one  dollars. 

The  time  has  arrived  when  the  inquiry  ought  to  be  seriously  made, 
whether  it  be  not  practicable  to  arrest  this  illegitimate  course  of  trade,  and 
secure  the  faithful  execution  of  the  laws.  No  time  could  be  more  suitable 
than  that  at  which  it  is  contemplated  to  make  a  great  reduction  of  the 
public  revenue.  Two  radical  clianges  have  presented  themselves  to  my 
mind,  and  which  I  will  now  suggest  for  consideration  and  investigation. 
On  such  a  subject  I  would,  however,  seek  from  the  mercantile  community 
and  practical  men  all  the  light  which  they  are  so  capable  of  affording,  and 
should  be  reluctant  to  act  on  my  own  convictions,  however  strong. 

The  first  is,  to  make  a  total  change  in  the  place  of  valuation.  Now  the 
valuation  is  made  in  foreign  countries.  We  fix  the  duties,  and  we  leave  to 
foreigners  to  assess  the  value  on  articles  paying  ad  valorem  duties.  That 
is,  we  prescribe  the  rule,  and  leave  the  execution  of  it  to  the  foreigner. 
This  is  an  anomaly,  I  believe,  peculiar  to  this  country.  It  is  evident  that 
the  amount  of  duty  payable  on  a  given  article,  subject  to  an  ad  valorem 
duty,  may  be  affected  as  much  by  the  fixation  of  the  value  as  by  the 
specification  of  the  duty.  And,  for  all  practical  purposes,  it  would  be  just 
as  safe  to  retain  to  ourselves  the  ascertainment  of  the  value,  and  leave  to 
the  foreigner  to  prescribe  the  duty,  as  it  is  to  reserve  to  ourselves  the  right 
to  declare  the  duty  and  allow  to  him  the  privilege  to  assess  the  value. 

The  effect  of  this  vicious  condition  of  the  law  has  been  to  throw  almost 
the  whole  import  trade  of  the  country,  as  to  some  important  articles,  into 
the  hands  of  the  foreigner.  I  have  been  informed  that  seven  eighths  of  the 
importations  of  woolens  into  the  port  of  New  York,  where  more  is  received 
than  in  all  the  other  ports  of  the  United  States  together,  are  in  his  hands. 
This  has  not  proceeded  from  any  want  of  enterprise,  intelligence,  or  capital, 
on  the  part  of  the  American  merchant ;  for  in  these  particulars  he  is  sur- 
passed by  the  merchant  of  no  country.  It  has  resulted  from  his  probity, 
his  character,  and  his  respect  to  the  laws  and  institutions  of  his  country — 
a  respect  which  does  not  influence  the  foreigner.  I  am  aware  it  is  made, 
by  law,  the  duty  of  the  appraiser  to  ascertain  the  value  of  the  goods  in 
certain  cases.  But  what  is  his  chief  guide.  It  is  the  foreign  invoice,  made 
by  whom  he  knows  not ;  certainly  by  no  person  responsible  to  our  laws. 
And  if  its  fairness  be  contested,  they  will  bring  you  cart-loads  of  certificates 
and  affidavits,  from  unknown  persons,  to  verify  its  exactness  and  the  first 
cost  of  the  article. 

Now,  sir,  it  seems  to  me  that  this  is  a  state  of  things  to  which  we  should 
promptly  apply  an  efficient  remedy ;  and  no  other  appears  to  me  but  that 


ON    THE    REDUCTION    OF    DUTIES    ON    IMPORTS.  425 

of  taking  into  our  own  bands  both  parts  of  the  operation — the  ascertainment 
of  tbe  value  as  well  as  tbe  duty  to  be  paid  on  the  goods.  If  it  be  said  that 
we  might  have  in  different  ports  different  rules,  the  answer  is,  that  there 
could  be  no  diversity  greater  than  that  to  which  we  are  liable,  from  the 
fact  of  the  valuation  being  now  made  in  all  the  ports  of  foreign  countries 
from  which  we  make  our  importations.  And  that  it  is  better  to  have  the 
valuations  made  by  persons  responsible  to  our  own  government,  and  reg- 
ulated by  one  head,  than  by  unknown  foreigners  standing  under  no  re- 
sponsibility whatever  to  us.  The  other  change  to  which  I  allude  is,  to 
reduce  the  credits  allowed  for  the  payment  of  duties,  and  to  render  them 
uniform.  It  would  be  better,  if  not  injurious  to  commerce,  to  abolish  them 
altogether.  Now  we  have  various  periods  of  credit,  graduated  according 
to  the  distance  of  the  foreign  port  and  the  nature  of  the  trade.  These 
credits  operate  as  so  much  capital,  on  which  the  foreign  merchant  can 
sometimes  make  several  adventures  before  the  day  of  payment  arrives. 
There  is  no  reciprocal  advantage  afforded  to  the  American  merchant,  I 
believe,  in  any  foreign  port.  As  we  shall  probably  abolish,  or  greatly  re- 
duce the  duties  on  all  articles  imported  beyond  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope, 
on  which  the  longest  credits  are  allowed,  the  moment  would  seem  to  be 
propitious  for  restricting  the  other  credits  in  such  manner,  that  while  they 
afforded  a  reasonable  facility  to  the  merchant,  they  should  not  supply  the 
foreigner,  at  the  instance  of  the  public,  with  capital  for  his  mercantile 
operations.  If  the  laws  can  be  strictly  enforced,  and  some  such  alterations 
as  have  been  suggested  can  be  carried  into  effect,  it  is  quite  probable  that 
a  satisfactory  reduction  may  be  made  on  some  of  the  articles  falling  within 
the  system  of  protection.  And  without  impairing  its  principle,  other  modes 
of  relief  may  probably  be  devised  to  some  of  those  interests  upon  which  it 
is  suffered  to  press  most  heavily. 

There  remains  one  view  to  present  to  the  Senate,  in  respect  to  the 
amount  of  reduction  of  the  revenue  which  will  be  produced  by  the  pro- 
posed measure  if  adopted,  and  its  influence  upon  the  payment  of  the  public 
debt  within  the  time  suggested  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury.  The 
estimate  which  I  have  made  of  that  amount,  is  founded  upon  treasury 
returns  prior  to  the  late  reduction  of  duties  on  tea,  coffee,  and  cocoa. 
Supposing  the  duties  on  wines  and  silks  to  be  reduced  as  low  as  I  think 
they  may  be,  the  total  amount  of  revenue  with  which  the  proposed  meas- 
ure will  dispense,  will  be  about  seven  millions  of  dollars.  The  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury  estimates  the  receipts  of  the  present  year,  from  all  sources, 
at  thirty  millions  one  hundred  thousand  dollars ;  and  he  supposes  those 
of  the  next  year  will  be  of  an  equal  amount.  He  acknowledges  that  the 
past  year  has  been  one  of  extraordinary  commercial  activity,  but  on  what 
principles  does  he  anticipate  that  the  present  will  also  be  \  The  history 
of  our  commerce  demonstrates  that  it  alternates,  and  that  a  year  of  intem- 
perate speculation,  is  usually  followed  by  one  of  more  guarded  importa- 
tion.   That  the  importations  of  the  last  year  have  been  excessive,  I  believe 


426  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

is  generally  confessed,  and  is  demonstrated  by  two  unerring  facts.  The 
first  is,  that  the  imports  have  exceeded  the  exports,  by  about  seventeen 
millions  of  dollars.  Whatever  may  be  the  qualifications  to  which  the  theory 
of  the  balance  of  trade  may  be  liable,  it  may  be  safely  affirmed  that  when 
the  aggregate  of  the  importations  from  all  foreign  countries  exceeds  the 
aggregate  of  the  exportations  to  all  foreign  countries,  considerably,  the  un- 
favorable balance  must  be  made  up  by  a  remittance  of  the  precious  metals 
to  some  extent.  Accordingly  we  find  the  existence  of  the  other  facts  to 
which  I  allude,  the  high  price  of  bills  of  exchange  on  England.  It  is, 
therefore,  fairly  to  be  anticipated,  that  the  duties  accruing  this  year  will  be 
less  in  amount  than  those  of  the  past  year.  And  I  think  it  would  be  un- 
wise to  rely  upon  our  present  information,  as  to  the  income  of  either  of 
these  two  years,  as  furnishing  a  safe  guide  for  the  future.  The  years 
1829-30  will  supply  a  surer  criterion.  There  is  a  remarkable  coincidence 
in  the  amount  of  the  receipts  into  the  treasury  during  those  two  years,  it 
having  been  the  first,  from  all  sources,  twenty-four  million  eight  hundred 
and  twenty-seven  thousand  six  hundred  and  twenty-seven  dollars  and 
thirty-eight  cents,  and  the  second,  twenty-four  million  eight  hundred  and 
forty-four  thousand  one  hundred  and  sixteen  dollars  and  fifty-one  cents, 
differing  only  about  seventeen  thousand  dollars. 

The  mode  recommended  by  the  secretary  for  the  modification  of  the 
tariff  is,  to  reduce  no  part  of  the  duties  on  the  unprotected  articles  prior 
to  March,  1833,  and  then  to  retain  a  considerable  portion  of  them.  And 
as  to  the  protected  class,  he  would  make  a  gradual  but  prospective  reduc- 
tion of  the  duties.  The  effect  of  this  would  be  to  destroy  the  protecting 
system,  by  a  slow  but  certain  poison.  The  object  being  to  reduce  the 
revenue,  every  descending  degree  in  the  scale  of  his  plan  of  gradual  re- 
duction, by  letting  in  more  of  the  foreign  article  to  displace  the  domestic 
rival  fabric,  would  increase  the  revenue,  and  create  the  necessity  for  further 
and  further  reduction  of  duties,  until  they  would  be  carried  so  low  as  to 
end  in  the  entire  subversion  of  the  system  of  protection. 

For  the  reasons  which  have  been  assigned,  it  would,  I  think,  be  unwise 
in  Congress  at  this  time  to  assume  for  the  future,  that  there  would  be  a 
greater  amount  of  net  annual  revenue  from  all  sources,  including  the  pub- 
lic lands,  than  twenty-five  millions  of  dollars.  Deducting  from  that  sum 
the  amount  of  seven  millions  of  dollars,  which  it  has  been  supposed  ought 
to  be  subtracted,  if  the  resolution  before  you  should  be  adopted,  there 
would  remain  eighteen  millions  of  dollars,  as  the  probable  revenue  for  fu- 
ture years.  This  includes  the  sum  of  three  millions  of  dollars,  estimated 
as  the  future  annual  receipt  from  the  sale  of  the  public  lands — an  esti- 
mate which  I  presume  will  be  demonstrated  by  experience  to  be  much  too 
large. 

If  a  reduction  so  large  as  seven  millions  be  made  at  this  session,  and 
if  the  necessary  measures  be  also  adopted  to  detect  and  punish  frauds,  and 
insure  a  faithful  execution  of  the  laws,  we  may  safely  make  a  temporary 


ON   THE    REDUCTION    OF    DUTIES    ON   IMPORTS.  427 

pause,  and  await  the  development  of  the  effect  of  these  arrangements  upoD 
the  revenue.  That  the  authority  of  the  laws  should  be  vindicated,  all 
ought  to  agree.  Now  the  fraudulent  importer,  after  an  exposure  of  his 
fraud,  by  a  most  strange  treasury  construction  of  the  law  (made,  I  under- 
stand, however,  not  by  the  present  secretary),  eludes  all  punishment,  and 
is  only  required  to  pay  those  very  duties  which  he  was  originally  bound 
for,  but  which  he  dishonestly  sought  to  evade.  Other  measures,  with  a 
view  to  a  further  reduction  of  the  revenue,  may  be  adopted.  In  some  in- 
stances there  might  be  an  augmentation  of  duties  for  that  purpose.  I 
will  mention  the  article  of  foreign  distilled  spirits.  In  no  other  country 
upon  earth  is  there  so  much  of  the  foreign  article  imported  as  in  this. 
The  duties  ought  to  be  doubled,  and  the  revenue  thereby  further  reduced 
from  a  million  of  dollars  to  six  hundred  thousand.  The  public  morals, 
the  grain-growing  country,  the  fruit-raising  and  the  cane-planting  country, 
would  be  all  benefited  by  rendering  their  duty  prohibitory.  I  have  not 
proposed  the  measure,  because  it  ought  to  originate,  perhaps  in  the  other 
House. 

That  the  measure  which  I  have  proposed  may  be  adopted,  without  in- 
terfering with  the  plan  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  for  the  payment 
of  the  public  debt  by  the  4th  of  March  next,  I  will  now  proceed  to  show. 
The  secretary  estimates  that  the  receipts  of  the  present  year,  after  meeting 
all  other  just  engagements,  will  leave  a  surplus  of  fourteen  millious  of  dol- 
lars, applicable  to  the  payment  of  the  principal  of  the  debt.     With  this 
sum,  eight  millions  of  dollars,  which  he  proposes  to  derive  from  the  sale 
of  the  bank  stock,  and  two  millions  of  dollars,  which  he  would  anticipate 
from  the  revenue  of  the  next  year,  he  suggests  that  the  whole  of  the  debt 
remaining,  may  be  discharged  by  the  time  indicated.     The  fourteen  mil- 
lions, I  understand  (although  on  this  subject  the  report  is  not  perfectly  ex- 
plicit), are  receipts  anticipated  this  year,  from  duties  which  accrued  last 
year.      If  this  be  the  secretary's  meaning,  it  is  evident  that  he  wants  no 
part  of  the  duties  which  may  accrue  during  the  current  year,  to  execute 
his  plan.     But  if  his  meaning  be,  that  the  fourteen  millions  will  be  com- 
posed, in  part  of  duties  accruing  and  payable  within  the  present  year,  then 
the  measure   proposed  might  prevent  the  payment  of  the  whole  of  the 
remnant  of  the  debt  by  the  exact  day  which  has  been  stated.     If,  how- 
ever, the  entire  seven  millions  embraced  by  the  resolution  on  your  table 
were  subtracted  from  the  fourteen,  it  would  still  leave  him  seven  millions, 
besides  the  bank  stock  to  be  applied  to  the  debt,  and  that,  of  itself,  would 
be  three  millions  more  than  can  be  properly  applied  to  the  object  in  the 
course  of  this  year,  as  I  have  already  endeavored  to  show. 

I  came  here,  sir,  most  anxiously  desiring  that  an  arrangement  of  the 
public  revenue  should  be  made,  which,  without  sacrificing  any  of  the  great 
interests  of  the  country,  would  reconcile  and  satisfy  all  its  parts.  I  thought 
I  perceived,  in  the  class  of  objects  not  produced  within  the  country,  a  field 
on  which  we  could  all  enter,  in  a  true  and  genuine  spirit  of  compromise 


428  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

and  harmony,  and  agree  upon  an  amicable  adjustment.  Why  should  it  not 
be  done  ?  Why  should  those  who  are  opposed  to  the  American  system, 
demand  of  its  friends  an  unconditional  surrender  ?  Our  common  object 
should  be,  so  to  reduce  the  public  revenue  as  to  relieve  the  burdens  of  the 
people,  if  the  people  of  this  country  can  be  truly  said  to  be  burdened. 
The  government  must  have  a  certain  amount  of  revenue,  and  that  amount 
must  be  collected  from  the  imposts.  Is  it  material  to  the  consumer, 
wherever  situated,  whether  the  collection  be  made  upon  a  few,  or  many 
objects,  provided,  whatever  be  the  mode,  the  amount  of  his  contribution  to 
the  public  exchequer  remains  the  same  ?  If  the  assessment  can  be  made 
on  objects  which  will  greatly  benefit  large  portions  of  the  Union,  without 
injury  to  him,  why  should  he  object  to  the  selection  of  those  objects  ? 
Yes,  sir,  I  came  here  in  a  spirit  of  warm  attachment  to  all  parts  of  our  be- 
loved country,  with  a  lively  solicitude  to  restore  and  preserve  its  harmony, 
and  with  a  firm  determination  to  pour  oil  and  balm  into  existing  wounds, 
rather  than  further  to  lacerate  them.  For  the  truth  and  sincerity  of  these 
declarations,  I  appeal  to  Him  whom  none  can  deceive.  I  expected  to  be 
met  by  corresponding  dispositions,  and  hoped  that  our  deliberations,  guided 
by  fraternal  sentiments  and  feelings,  would  terminate  in  diffusing  con- 
tentment and  satisfaction  throughout  the  land.  And  that  such  may  be 
the  spirit  presiding  over  them,  and  such  their  issue,  I  yet  most  fervently 
hope. 


ON  MR.  VAN  BURENS  NOMINATION  AS 
MINISTER  TO   ENGLAND, 

IN  THE   SENATE,  JANUARY  24,   1832. 

[Doubtless  there  was  just  cause,  as  shown  in  the  following 
speech,  of  dissatisfaction  in  the  Senate  and  in  the  country,  to 
this  nomination  of  Mr.  Van  Buren  to  the  Court  of  St.  James  ; 
but  was  it  expedient  for  the  Senate  to  reject  it  ?     The  sequel 
showed,  that  this  act  of  rejection  made  Mr.  Van  Buren  vice- 
president  first,  and  president  next.     General  Jackson's  power 
over  the  minds  of  the  majority  of  the  American  people,  was  irre- 
sistible, and  the  opposition  of  the  Senate  in  this  case,  probably 
augmented  that  power.     That  Mr.  Clay,  Mr.  Calhoun,  and  oth- 
ers, opponents  of  this  nomination,  should  not  have  foreseen  a 
result  of  this  kind,  or  adopted  a  policy  based  upon  it,  must  be 
ascribed,  one  would  think,  to  the  single  purpose  of  doing  pres- 
ent justice  to  the  nominee,   rather  than  of  regarding  conse- 
quences.    The  Senate  were  equally  divided  in  this  vote,  and  the 
rejection  of  Mr.  Van   Buren  required  the  casting  vote  of  the 
vice-president,  Mr.  Calhoun,  which  was  given.     The  injunction 
of  secrecy  having  been  removed,  the  speeches  and  votes  of  this 
executive  session  of  the  Senate  were  all  made  public,  and  after- 
ward used,  with  great  effect,  by  the  Jackson  party,  to  advance 
the  interest  of  Mr.  Van  Buren,  first  as  candidate,  this  very  year, 
1832,  for  the  vice-presidency,  and  afterward,  1836,  as  candidate 
for  the  presidency,  in  both  of  which  he  was  successful.     With 
the  majority  of  the  American  people,   this  opposition  of  the 
Senate  was  not  ascribed  to  patriotic  motives,  but  to  a  spirit  of 
revenge.    Mr.  Calhoun,  who  gave  the  casting  vote,  certainly  had 
reasons   for  revenge  ;   for  Mr.  Van  Buren  had  ruined  all  his 
chances  for  the  succession,  by  disclosing  to  General  Jackson  the 
fact,  that  he  (Mr.  Calhoun),  while  a  member  of  Mr.  Monroe's 
cabinet,  had  moved  a  censure  on  General  Jackson,  for  his  con- 
duct of  the  Seminole  War,  and  it  is  quite  probable  that  this 
state  of  personal  feeling  had  an  influence  in  producing  Mr.  Cal- 


430  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 


hoim's  casting  vote  against  Mr.  Van  Buren.     It  would  almost 
seem  morally  impossible  that  it  should  be  otherwise. 

As  to  the  grounds  of  Mr.  Clay's  opposition,  they  are  presented 
in  the  following  speech,  in  a  manly  and  statesman-like  manner, 
and  no  one  can  fail  to  appreciate  their  strength.  But  still  one 
can  not  but  feel  that  he  might  as  well  have  passed  over  the  mat- 
ter in  silence,  and  allowed  Mr.  Van  Buren  to  stay  in  London. 
But  as  Mr.  Clay  did  not  study  expediency,  personal  to  himself, 
in  his  speech  on  the  Seminole  war,  so  neither  did  he  do  it  in 
this  case.  He  was  not  the  man  to  do  it  in  any  case.  With  him 
it  was  simply  a  question  of  truth  and  of  patriotic  duty,  though 
he  might,  and  in  this  instance  we  think  he  did,  partly  misjudge. 
Mr.  Van  Buren  doubtless  had  talent  enough  for  the  mission  to 
London,  and  it  was  not  likely  that  he  would  there  prove  so  un- 
patriotic as  Mr.  Clay  has  demonstrated  in  his  speech  that  he  did 
while  acting  as  Secretary  of  State.  It  was  simply  a  question, 
whether  Mr.  Van  Buren' s  rejection  would  open  a  wider  door  for 
what  Mr.  Clay  would  regard  as  his  pernicious  influence  at 
home.  The  decision  of  the  Senate  opened  that  door  most  ef- 
fectually. Mr.  Van  Buren  was  rejected  ;  he  came  home  ;  and 
was  immediately  put  in  nomination  and  elected  as  vice-presi- 
dent. Next  he  succeeded  to  the  presidency,  and  in  1840,  hav- 
ing run  down  the  commercial  prosperity  of  the  country  to  the 
lowest  ebb  by  his  policy,  he  was  superseded  by  the  election  of 
General  Harrison.  The  Senate  of  the  United  States,  by  reject- 
ing him  as  minister  to  London,  gave  him  full  sweep  at  home, 
till  the  people  arrested  his  career.] 

Mr.  President — I  regret  that  I  find  myself  utterly  unable  to  reconcile 
with  the  duty  I  owe  to  my  country  a  vote  in  favor  of  this  nomination.  I 
regret  it,  because  in  all  the  past  strife  of  party  the  relations  of  ordinary 
civility  and  courtesy  were  never  interrupted  between  the  gentleman  whose 
name  is  before  us  and  myself.  But  I  regard  my  obligations  to  the  people 
of  the  United  States,  and  to  the  honor  and  character  of  their  government, 
as  paramount  to  every  private  consideration.  There  was  no  necessity 
known  to  us  for  the  departure  of  this  gentleman  from  the  United  States, 
prior  to  the  submission  of  his  name  to  the  Senate.  Great  Britain  was  rep- 
resented here  by  a  diplomatic  agent,  having  no  higher  rank  than  that  of 
a  charge  des  affaires.  We  were  represented  in  England  by  one  of  equal 
rank ;  one  who  had  shed  luster  upon  his  country  by  his  high  literary  char- 
acter, and  of  whom  it  may  be  justly  said,  that  in  no  respect  was  he  inferior 
to  the  gentleman  before  us.  Although  I  shall  not  controvert  the  right  of  ' 
the  president,  in  an  extraordinary  case,  to  send  abroad  a  public  minister 


NOMINATION    OF    MR.    VAN    BUREN   TO    ENGLAND.  431 

without  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  Senate,  I  do  not  admit  that  it  ever 
ought  to  be  done  without  the  existence  of  some  special  cause,  to  be  com- 
municated to  the  Senate.  We  have  received  no  communication  of  the  ex- 
istence of  any  such  special  cause.  This  view  of  the  matter  might  nut  have 
beeu  sufficient  alone  to  justify  a  rejection  of  this  nomination  ;  but  it  is  suf- 
ficient to  authorize  us  to  examine  the  subject  with  as  perfect  freedom  as  we 
could  have  done  if  the  minister  had  remained  in  the  United  States,  and 
awaited  the  decision  of  the  Senate.  I  consider  myself,  therefore,  not  com- 
mitted by  the  separate  and  unadvised  act  of  the  president  in  despatching 
Mr.  Van  Bureu  in  the  vacation  of  the  Senate,  and  not  a  very  long  time 
before  it  was  to  assemble. 

My  main  objection  to  the  confirmation  of  his  appointment  arises  out  of 
his  instructions  to  the  late  minister  of  the  United  States  at  the  court  of 
Great  Britain.  The  attention  of  the  Senate  has  been  already  called  to  parts 
of  those  instructions,  but  there  are  other  parts  of  them,  in  my  opinion, 
highly  reprehensible.  Speaking  of  the  colonial  question,  he  says,  •'  in  re- 
viewing the  events  which  have  preceded,  and  more  or  less  contributed,  to 
a  result  so  much  to  be  regretted,  there  will  be  found  three  grounds,  on 
which  we  are  most  assailable.  First,  in  our  too  long  and  too  tenaciously 
resisting  the  right  of  Great  Britain  to  impose  protecting  duties  in  her  col- 
onies." *  *  *  "And,  thirdly,  in  omitting  to  accept  the  terms  offer- 
ed by  the  act  of  Parliament  of  July,  1825,  after  the  subject  had  been 
brought  before  Congress,  and  deliberately  acted  upon  by  our  government. 
*  *  *  You  will,  therefore,  see  the  propriety  of  possessing  yourself  of 
all  the  explanatory  and  mitigating  circumstances  connected  with  them, 
that  you  may  be  enabled  to  obviate,  as  far  as  practicable,  the  unfavorable 
impression  which  they  have  produced."  And  after  reproaching  the  late 
administration  with  setting  up  claims  and  for  the  first  time,  which  they 
explicitly  abandoned,  he  says,  in  conclusion,  "  I  will  add  nothing  as  to  the 
impropriety  of  suffering  any  feelings,  that  find  their  origin  in  the  past 
pretensions  of  this  government,  to  have  adverse  influence  upon  the  present 
conduct  of  Great  Britain.1' 

On  our  side,  according  to  Mr.  Van  Buren,  all  was  wrong ;  on  the  British 
side,  all  was  right.  We  brought  forward  nothing  but  claims  and  preten- 
sions. The  British  government  asserted,  ou  the  other  hand,  a  clear  and  in- 
contestable light.  We  erred  in  too  tenaciously  and  too  long  insisting  upon 
our  pretensions,  and  not  yielding  at  once  to  the  force  of  their  just  demands. 
And  Mr.  McLane  was  commanded  to  avail  himself  of  all  the  circumstances 
in  his  power  to  mitigate  our  offense,  and  to  dissuade  the  British  govern- 
ment from  allowing  their  feelings,  justly  incurred  by  the  past  conduct  of 
the  party  driven  from  power,  to  have  an  adverse  influence  toward  the 
American  party  now  in  power.  Sir,  w7as  this  becoming  language  from  one 
independent  nation  to  another  ?  Was  it  proper,  in  the  mouth  of  an  Amer- 
ican minister  ?  Was  it  it  in  conformity  with  the  high,  unsullied,  and  dig- 
nified character  of  our  previous  diplomacy  ?     Was  it  not,  on  the  contrary 


432  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

the  language  of  an  humble  vassal  to  a  proud  and  haughty  lord  ?     Was  it 
not  prostrating  and  degrading  the  American  eagle  before  the  British  lion  ? 

Let  us  examine  a  little  those  pretensions  which  the  American  government 
so  unjustly  put  forward,  and  so  pertinaciously  maintain.  The  American 
government  contended,  that  the  produce  of  the  United  States  ought  to  be 
admitted  into  the  British  West  Indies,  on  the  same  terms  as  similar  pro- 
duce of  the  British  American  continental  possessions  ;  that  without  this 
equality  our  produce  could  not  maintain  in  the  British  West  Indies  a 
fair  competition  with  the  produce  of  Canada,  and  that  British  preference 
given  to  the  Canadian  produce  in  the  West  Indies  would  draw  from  the 
western  part  of  New  York,  and  the  northern  part  of  Ohio,  American  pro- 
duce into  Canada,  aggrandizing  Montreal  and  Quebec,  and  giving  employ- 
ment to  British  shipping,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  canals  of  New  York,  the 
port  of  New  York,  and  American  shipping. 

This  was  the  offense  of  the  American  government,  and  we  are  at  this 
moment  realizing  the  evils  which  it  foresaw.  Our  produce  is  passing  into 
Canada,  enriching  her  capitals,  and  nourishing  British  navigation.  Our 
own  wheat  is  transported  from  the  western  part  of  New  York  into  Canada, 
there  manufactured,  and  then  transported  in  British  ships  in  the  form  of 
Canadian  flour.  We  are  thus  deprived  of  the  privilege  even  of  manufac- 
turing our  own  grain.  And  when  the  produce  of  the  United  States,  ship- 
ped from  the  Atlantic  ports,  arrives  at  the  British  West  Indies,  it  is  unable, 
in  consequence  of  the  heavy  duties  with  which  most  of  it  is  burdened,  to 
sustain  a  competition  with  British  or  colonial  produce,  freely  admitted. 

The  general  rule  may  be  admitted,  that  every  nation  has  a  right  to 
favor  its  own  productions,  by  protecting  duties,  or  other  regulations ;  but, 
like  all  genei'al  rules,  it  must  have  its  exceptions.  And  the  relation  in 
which  Great  Britain  stands  to  her  continental  and  West  India  colonies, 
from  which  she  is  separated  by  a  vast  sea,  and  the  relations  in  which  the 
United  States  stand  to  those  colonies,  some  of  which  are  in  juxtaposition 
with  them,  constitute  a  fit  case  for  such  an  exception. 

It  is  true,  that  the  late  administration  did  authorize  Mr.  Gallatin  to  treat 
with  Great  Britain  on  the  basis  of  the  rule  which  has  been  stated,  but  it 
was  with  the  express  understanding,  that  some  competent  provision  should 
be  made  in  the  treaty  to  guard  against  the  British  monopoly  of  the  trans- 
portation of  our  own  produce  passing  through  Canada.  Mr.  Gallatin  was 
informed,  "  that  the  United  States  consent  to  the  demand  which  they  have 
heretofore  made  of  the  admission  of  their  productions  into  British  colonies, 
at  the  same  and  no  higher  rate  of  duty  as  similar  productions  are  charge- 
able with  when  imported  from  one  into  another  British  colony,  with  the 
exception  of  our  produce  descending  the  St.  Lawrence  and  the  Sorell." 

There  was  no  abandonment  of  our  right,  no  condemnation  of  the  pre- 
vious conduct  of  our  government,  no  humiliating  admission,  that  Ave  had 
put  forth  and  too  tenaciously  clung  to  unsustainable  pretensions,  and  that 
Great  Britain  had  all  along  been  in  the  right.     We  only  forbore  for  the 


NOMINATION   OF   MR.   VAN   BUREN   TO   ENGLAND.  433 

present  to  assert  a  right,  leaving  ourselves  at  liberty  subsequently  to  resume 
it.  What  Mr.  Gallatin  was  authorized  to  do  was,  to  make  a  temporary 
concession,  and  it  was  proposed  with  this  preliminary  annunciation  :  "  But, 
notwithstanding,  on  a  full  consideration  of  the  whole  subject,  the  president, 
anxious  to  give  a  strong  proof  to  Great  Britain  of  the  desire  of  the  gov- 
ernment of  the  United  States  to  arrange  this  long-contested  matter  of  the 
colonial  intercourse  in  a  manner  mutually  satisfactory,  authorizes  you," 
etc.  And  Mr.  Gallatin  was  required  "  to  endeavor  to  made  a  lively  impres- 
6ion  on  the  British  government  of  the  conciliatory  spirit  of  that  of  the 
United  States,  which  has  dictated  the  present  liberal  offer,  and  of  their 
expectation  to  meet,  in  the  progress  of  the  negotiations,  with  a  correspond- 
ing friendly  disposition." 

Now,  sir,  keeping  sight  of  the  object  which  the  late  Secretary  of  State 
had  in  view,  the  opening  of  the  trade  with  the  British  colonies,  which  was 
the  best  mode  to  accomplish  it — to  send  our  minister  to  prostrate  himself 
as  a  suppliant  before  the  British  throne,  and  to  say  to  the  British  king, 
we  have  offended  your  majesty  !  the  late  American  administration  brought 
forward  pretensions  which  we  can  not  sustain,  and  they  too  long  and  too 
tenaciously  adhered  to  them  !  your  majesty  was  always  in  the  right ;  but 
we  hope  that  your  majesty  will  be  graciously  pleased  to  recollect,  that  it 
was  not  we  who  are  now  in  possession  of  the  American  power,  but  those 
who  have  been  expelled  from  it,  that  wronged  your  majesty,  and  that  we, 
when  out  of  power,  were  on  the  side  of  your  majesty  ;  and  we  do  humbly 
pray,  that  your  majesty,  taking  all  mitigating  circumstances'  into  consider- 
ation, will  graciously  coudescend  to  extend  to  us  the  privileges  of  the  British 
act  of  Parliament  of  1825,  and  to  grant  us  the  boon  of  a  trade  with  your 
majesty's  West  India  colonies — or  to  have  presented  himself  before  the 
British  monarch  in  the  manly  and  dignified  attitude  of  a  minister  of  this 
republic,  and,  abstaining  from  all  condemnation  or  animadversion  upon  the 
past  conduct  of  his  own  government,  to  have  placed  the  withdrawal  of 
our  former  demand  upon  the  ground  of  concession  in  a  spirt  of  amity  and 
compromise  ? 

But  the  late  Secretary  of  State,  the  appointed  organ  of  the  American 
people  to  vindicate  their  rights  with  all  foreign  powers,  and  to  expose  the 
injustice  of  any  unfounded  demands  which  they  might  assert,  was  not  con- 
tent to  exert  his  own  ingenuity  to  put  his  own  country  in  the  wrong,  and 
the  British  government  in  the  light.  He  endeavored  to  attach  to  the  late 
administration  the  discredit  of  bringing  forward  unfounded  pretensions,  and 
by  disclaiming  them,  to  propitiate  the  favor  of  the  British  king.  He  says 
that  the  views  of  the  present  administration  upon  the  subject  of  the  colonial 
trade  "  have  been  submitted  to  the  people  of  the  United  States,  and  the 
counsels  by  which  your  conduct  is  now  directed  are  the  result  of  the  judg- 
ment expressed  by  the  only  earthly  tribunal  to  which  the  late  administra- 
tion was  amenable  for  its  acts.  It  should  be  sufficient,  that  the  claims  set 
up  by  them,  and  what  caused  the  interruption  of  the  trade  in  question, 

28 


434  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

have  been  explicitly  abandoned  by  those  who  first  asserted  them,  and  are 
not  revived  by  their  successors."  The  late  Secretary  of  State — the  gentle- 
man under  consideration — here  makes  the  statement,  that  the  late  admin- 
istration were  the  first  to  set  up  the  claims  to  which  he  refers.  Now,  under 
all  the  high  responsibility  which  belongs  to  the  seat  which  I  occupy,  I  de- 
liberately pronounce  that  this  statement  is  untrue,  and  that  the  late  Secre- 
tary either  must  have  known  it  to  be  untrue,  or  he  was  culpably  negligent 
of  his  duty  in  not  ascertaining  what  had  been  done  under  prior  adminis- 
trations. I  repeat  the  charge,  the  statement  must  have  been  known  to  be 
untrue,  or  there  was  culpable  negligence.  If  it  were  material,  I  believe  it 
could  be  shown  that  the  claim  in  question — the  right  to  the  admission  into 
the  British  West  Indies  of  the  produce  of  the  United  States  upon  an  equal 
footing  with  similar  produce  of  the  British  continental  colonies — is  coeval 
with  the  existence  of  our  present  Constitution,  and  that  whenever  the  occa- 
sion arose  for  asserting  the  claim,  it  was  asserted.  But  I  shall  go  no  further 
back  than  to  Mr.  Madison's  administration.  Mr.  Monroe,  the  then  Secre- 
tary of  State,  instructed  our  then  minister  at  London  upon  this  subject. 
He  negotiated  with  Lord  Castlereagh  in  respect  to  it,  and  this  very  claim 
prevented  an  adjustment  at  that  time  of  the  colonial  question.  It  was 
again  brought  forward  under  Mr.  Monroe's  administration,  when  Mr.  Rush 
was  our  minister  at  London.  He  opened  a  long  and  protracted  negotiation 
upon  this  and  other  topics,  which  was  suspended  in  the  summer  of  1824, 
principally  because  the  parties  could  not  agree  on  any  satisfactory  arrange- 
ment of  this  very  colonial  question. 

Thus,  at  least,  two  administrations  prior  to  that  of  Mr.  Adams'  had 
brought  forward  this  identical  claim  or  pretension,  which  his  was  the  first 
to  assert,  according  to  the  late  Secretary  of  State. 

The  next  charge  which  the  late  Secretary  of  State — the  official  defender 
of  the  rights  of  the  American  people — preferred  against  his  own  govern- 
ment, was  that  of  "  omitting  to  accept  the  terms  offered  by  the  act  of 
Parliament,  of  July,  1825,  after  the  subject  had  been  brought  before  Con- 
gress, and  deliberately  acted  upon  by  our  government."  Never  was  there 
a  more  unfounded  charge  brought  forward  by  any  native  against  his  own 
government,  and  never  was  there  a  more  unwarrantable  apology  set  up  for 
a  foreign  government ;  and  a  plain,  historical  narrative,  will  demonstrate 
the  truth  of  both  these  propositions. 

It  has  been  already  stated  that  the  negotiation  of  Mr.  Rush,  embracing 
the  precise  colonial  claim  under  consideration,  was  suspended  in  1824,  with 
an  understanding  between  the  two  governments,  that  it  was  to  be  resumed 
on  all  points  at  some  future  convenient  period.  Early  in  July,  1825,  neither 
government  having  then  proposed  a  resumption  of  the  negotiation,  the 
British  Parliament  passed  an  act  to  regulate  the  colonial  trade  with  foreign 
powers.  This  act  was  never,  during  the  late  administration,  either  at  Lon- 
don or  Washington,  officially  communicated  by  the  British  to  the  Amer- 
ican government,  and  we  only  obtained  it  through  other  channels.     Now 


NOMINATION   OF   MR.   VAN   BUREN   TO   ENGLAND.  435 

if  it  had  been  the  purpose  of  the  British  government,  by  the  passage  of 
that  act,  to  withdraw  the  colonial  question  from  the  negotiation,  it  ought 
to  have  communicated  that  purpose  to  this  government,  and  at  the  same 
time  the  act  of  Parliament  as  supplanting  and  substituting  the  negotiation. 
But  it  never  did  communicate  such  purpose.  The  act  itself  did  not  spe- 
cifically embrace  the  United  States,  and  offered  terms,  which,  upon  the  face 
of  the  act,  it  was  impossible  for  the  United  States  to  accede  to.  It  re- 
quired, for  example,  that,  to  entitle  powers  not  possessing  colonies,  to  the 
benefit  of  the  act,  they  must  place  the  navigation  and  commerce  of  Great 
Britain  upon  the  footing  of  the  most  favored  nations.  To  have  done  this, 
would  have  admitted  British  shipping  to  import  into  the  United  States,  on 
the  same  conditions  with  native  shipping,  the  productions  of  any  quarter 
of  the  globe,  without  a  reciprocal  liberty,  on  the  part  of  the  shipping  of 
the  United  States,  in  British  ports.  The  act  itself  was  differently  con- 
strued in  different  colonial  j)orts  of  Great  Britain,  and  an  order  of  the  local 
government  of  Halifax  closing  that  port  against  our  vessels  from  the  5th 
of  Janimry,  was  subsequently  revoked,  thereby  confirming  the  impression 
that  the  act  of  Parliament  was  not  intended  to  dispense  with  the  previous 
negotiation.  And  to  conclude  this  part  of  the  narrative,  as  late  as  the  20th 
of  October,  1826,  Mr.  Vaughan,  the  British  minister,  upon  being  interro- 
gated by  the  then  Secretary  of  State,  was  totally  uninstructed  to  afford 
any  information  as  to  the  meaning  or  iutent  of  the  act  of  July,  1825. 

Meantime,  in  March,  more  than  six  months  after  the  passage  of  the  act 
of  Parliament,  Mr.  Vaughan  notified  the  Department  of  State  that  he  had 
"  received  instructions  from  his  majesty's  government,  to  acquaint  you  that 
it  is  preparing  to  proceed  to  the  important  negotiations  between  that  coun- 
try and  the  United  States,  now  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  American  min- 
ister, in  London."  *  *  *  "  The  negotiations  will  therefore  be  forth- 
with resumed."  *  *  *  Here  the  negotiations  were  spoken  of  without 
exception  of  the  colonial  question,  the  most  important  of  them.  If  it  had 
been  intended  to  withdraw  that,  no  time  could  have  been  more  suitable  to 
announce  that  intention,  but  no  such  annunciation  was  made.  Mr.  Vaughan 
was  informed  that  we  also  would  prepare  for  the  negotiation  (including, 
of  course,  the  colonial  question),  and  Mr.  Gallatin  was  accordingly  shortly 
after  sent  out,  with  full  powers  and  instructions,  amicably  to  settle  that 
question.  On  his  arrival  in  England,  in  the  summer  of  1826,  he  was  told 
by  the  British  government  that  they  would  not  negotiate  on  the  colonial 
question ;  that  they  had  made  up  their  mind,  from  the  passage  of  the  act 
of  July,  1825,  not  to  negotiate  about  it;  and  he  was  informed  by  the  sar- 
castic Mr.  Canning,  that  as  we  had  failed  to  accept  the  boon  which  the 
British  government  had  then  offered,  we  were  then  too  late ! 

Such  is  the  state  of  the  case  on  which  the  late  Secretary  of  State  so 
authoritatively  .pronounces  judgment  against  his  own  government,  for 
"  omitting  to  accept  the  terms  offered  by  the  act  of  Parliament  of  July, 
1825!"     He  adds,  indeed,  "  after  the  subject  had  been  brought  before 


436  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

Congress,  and  deliberately  acted  upon  by  our  government."  It  was 
brought  before  Congress  in  the  session  of  1825-6,  not  at  the  instance  of 
the  American  executive,  but  upon  the  spontaneous  and  ill-judged  motion 
of  the  gentleman  from  Maryland  (Mr.  Smith),  and  Mr.  Gallatin  was  informed 
that  if  the  bill  proposed  by  that  gentleman  had  been  passed,  it  would  have 
been  unsatisfactory  to  the  British  government. 

I  have  another  objection  to  this  nomination.  I  believe,  upon  circum- 
stances which  satisfy  my  mind,  that  to  this  gentleman  is  principally  to  be 
ascribed  the  introduction  of  the  odious  system  of  proscription,  for  the  ex- 
ercise of  the  elective  franchise,  in  the  government  of  the  United  States.  I 
understand  that  it  is  the  system  on  which  the  party  in  his  own  State,  of 
which  he  is  the  reputed  head,  constantly  acts.  He  was  among  the 
first  of  the  secretaries  to  apply  that  system  to  the  dismission  of  clerks 
in  his  department,  known  to  me  to  be  highly  meritorious,  and  among 
them  one  who  is  now  a  representative  in  the  other  House.  It  is  a  detest- 
able system,  drawn  from  the  worst  periods  of  the  Roman  republic,  and  if 
it  were  to  be  perpetuated — if  the  offices,  honors,  and  dignities  of  the  peo- 
ple were  to  be  put  up  to  a  scramble,  and  to  be  decided  by  the  results  of 
every  presidential  election — our  government  and  institutions,  becoming  in- 
tolerable, would  finally  end  in  a  despotism  as  inexorable  as  that  at  Con- 
stantinople. 

Sir,  the  necessity  under  which  we  are  placed  is  painful.  But  it  is  no 
fault  of  the  Senate,  whose  consent  and  advice  are  required  by  the  Consti- 
tution, to  consummate  this  appointment,  that  the  minister  has  been  sent 
out  of  the  United  States  without  their  concurrence.  I  hope  that  the  pub- 
lic will  not  be  prejudiced  by  his  rejection,  if  he  should  be  rejected.  And 
I  feel  perfectly  assured,  that  if  the  government  to  which  he  has  been  de- 
puted, shall  learn  that  he  has  been  rejected,  because  he  has  there,  by  his 
instructions  to  Mr.  McLane,  stained  the  character  of  our  country,  the 
moral  effect  of  our  decision  will  greatly  outweigh  any  advantages  to  be 
derived  from  his  negotiations,  whatever  they  may  have  been  intended  to  be. 


ON   THE    AMERICAN    SYSTEM, 

IN  SENATE,  FEBRUARY  2,  3,  &  6,  1832. 

[The  resolution  of  Mr.  Clay,  of  January  11,  for  the  reduction 
of  duties  on  imports,  being  still  under  debate  in  the  Senate, 
after  having  listened  to  all  that  had  been  said  on  the  subject  in 
the  mean  time,  Mr.  Clay  commenced,  on  the  2d  of  February, 
1832,  what  may  be  called  his  great  speech  in  defense  of  the 
American  System,  which  he  continued  for  three  successive  days. 
Considering  the  state  of  the  science  of  Public  Economy,  as  it 
then  existed,  this  is  the  most  powerful  argument  that  had  ever 
been  made.  But  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the  science  of 
Public  Economy  has  made  a  great  stage  of  advance  since  the 
date  of  this  speech,  and  that,  if  Mr.  Clay  had  then  been  in  pos- 
session of  the  impositions  which  constitute  this  improvement, 
he  would  have  been  able  to  make  his  argument,  clear  and  forci- 
ble as  it  is,  far  more  clear  and  conclusive.  He  would  then  have 
applied  the  theory  of  the  science  in  its  present  state,  to  the  facts 
which  he  so  abundantly  adduced,  to  establish  it.  The  new  prop- 
ositions are  as  follows  :  That  so  long  as  protective  duties  are  not 
prohibitory,  they  are  not  a  tax  on  consumers,  but  they  dimmish 
prices;  and  when  the  duties  are  prohibitory  only  because  of  do- 
mestic competition,  they  are  still  not  taxes  on  consumers,  but 
reduce  prices.  The  first  of  these  propositions  is  the  main  one, 
and  perhaps  the  most  important,  though  both  are  important, 
and  based  on  the  same  principle. 

The  advantage  of  science  is,  that  it  presents  propositions  in 
form,  which  settle  controversy,  where  controversy  may  have  ex- 
isted. Sir  Isaac  Newton's  propositions  touching  the  laws  of 
gravitation,  have  never  been  controverted,  and  never  can  be,  be- 
cause they  are  strictly  scientific.  Having  ascertained  the  laws 
which  uniformly  produce  certain  results,  he  reduced  those  laws 
to  form,  which  constitutes  the  science.  Mr.  Clay  dealt  only  with 
facts,  and  his  facts  abundantly  proved  the  propositions  of  the 
science  above  stated  ;  but  neither  he  nor  any  body  else  had  at 


438  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

that  time  reduced  these  propositions  to  form,  or  set  up  the 
theory  which  they  announce.  Mr.  Clay  was  even  accustomed  to 
admit,  that  duties  were  in  all  cases  a  tax  on  consumers,  though 
he  proved  the  contrary,  as  the  following  speech  will  show.  He 
proved  that  the  American  System  had  so  reduced  the  prices  of 
articles  subject  to  duty,  and  enhanced  the  demand  for  the  agri- 
cultural products  of  this  country,  as  to  have  relieved  the  people 
from  an  immense  burden,  and  put  them  forward  in  an  unexam- 
pled career  of  prosperity  ;  but  he  never  thought  that  this  result 
was  owing  entirely  to  the  truth  of  the  propositions  above  stated, 
as  parts  of  a  science.  Triumphant  as  he  was  in  his  argument, 
by  the  statement  of  his  facts,  yet,  if  he  had  been  prepared  to 
lay  down  these  propositions  first,  he  would  have  walked  from  the 
field  on  ground  as  firm  as  that  which  Sir  Isaac  Newton  trod  upon 
when  he  propounded  his  theory  of  gravitation. 

Assuming  that  Mr.  Clay  has  proved  the  truth  of  these  propo- 
sitions in  his  speech — as  he  undoubtedly  has — let  us  see  how 
trade  operates  to  produce  this  result.  The  moment  when  a  pro- 
tective duty  encourages  the  American  producer  to  come  into  the 
field  of  competition  against  the  foreign  producer,  the  two  parties 
are  rivals  in  the  same  market,  and  both  will  sell  to  consumers  as 
low  as  they  can,  and  make  a  fair  profit.  As  Mr.  Clay  has  shown, 
the  prices  are  reduced.  The  reason  of  this  lies  in  the  fact  that, 
while  the  foreign  producer  had  the  monopoly  of  the  American 
market,  he  could  have  his  own  price,  with  a  profit  often  im- 
mensely great.  He  can,  therefore,  afford  to  reduce  his  prices, 
and  still  make  a  fair  profit  ;  and  just  so  long  as  he  continues  to 
bring  his  product  to  the  American  market,  in  competition  with 
the  American  producer,  it  is  morally  certain  that  prices  have 
been  reduced.  It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  that  the  protective 
duty  is  not  only  not  a  tax  on  the  consumer,  but  a  positive  bene- 
fit to  him,  to  the  amount  of  the  reduction  of  prices.  The 
theory,  therefore,  so  long  maintained,  that  protective  duties  are 
taxes  on  consumers,  is  exploded  by  these  propositions,  and  by 
the  facts  which  establish  them.  And  yet  this  theory,  so  utterly 
false,  was  permitted  to  rule  in  the  formation  of  the  tariff  of 
1846! 

The  first  proposition  of  the  science  of  Public  Economy  on 
this  point,  as  it  now  stands,  and  as  stated  above,  is,  that  protect- 
ive duties,  when  not  prohibitory,  are  not  taxes  on  consumers, 
but  reduce  prices.  Facts  prove  it,  and  the  explanation  of  the 
result  is  found  in  the  considerations  which  always  govern  trade. 


ON   THE    AMERICAN    SYSTEM.  439 

The  foreign  producer  will  continue  to  send  his  wares  to  the 
American  market  so  long  as  he  can  make  a  profit  ;  and  not  only 
the  protective  duty,  but  the  reduction  of  price  beyond  that, 
both  come  out  of  the  former  profits  of  the  foreign  producer. 
The  American  consumer  is  not  taxed,  but  gets  the  same  article 
at  a  lower  price.    This  is  an  inevitable  result  of  the  laws  of  trade. 

Further  :  when  the  foreign  producer  can  no  longer  afford  to 
bring  his  wares  to  the  American  market,  by  reason  of  this  com- 
petition, and  of  this  reduction  of  prices,  and  the  protective  duty 
becomes  prohibitory  in  its  operation,  it  is  still  in  favor  of  the 
American  consumer.  He  is  not  taxed,  but  beuefitcd,  so  long 
as  the  prohibition  arises  from  home  competition  against  the 
foreign  producer.  If  the  duty  be  imposed  expressly  for  prohibi- 
tion, it  may  be  a  tax  on  consumers,  and  probably  will  be  so, 
until  a  domestic  competition  shall  have  reduced  prices  to  the 
amount  of  the  duty.  Then  evidently  the  duty  is  no  longer  a 
tax. 

It  is  enough,  however,  that  protective  duties,  which  are  not 
prohibitory,  are  not  taxes.] 

In  one  sentiment,  Mr.  President,  expressed  by  the  honorable  gentleman 
from  South  Carolina  (General  Hayne),  though  perhaps  not  iu  the  sense 
intended  by  him,  I  entirely  concur.  I  agree  with  him,  that  the  decision 
on  the  system  of  policy  embraced  in  this  debate,  involves  the  future  des- 
tiny of  this  growing  country.  One  way,  I  verily  believe,  it  would  lead  to 
deep  and  general  distress,  general  bankruptcy,  and  national  ruin,  without 
benefit  to  any  part  of  the  Union ;  the  other,  the  existing  prosperity  will  be 
preserved  and  augmented,  and  the  nation  will  continue  rapidly  to  advance 
in  wealth,  power,  and  greatness,  without  prejudice  to  any  section  of  the 
confederacy. 

Thus  viewing  the  question,  I  stand  here  as  the  humble  but  zealous  ad- 
vocate, not  of  the  interests  of  one  State,  or  seveu  States  only,  but  of  the 
whole  Union.  And  never  before  have  I  felt,  more  intensely,  the  over- 
powering weight  of  that  share  of  responsibility  which  belongs  to  me  in 
these  deliberations.  Never  before  have  I  had  more  occasion  than  I  now 
have,  to  lament  my  want  of  those  intellectual  powers,  the  possession  of 
which  might  enable  me  to  unfold  to  this  Senate  and  to  illustrate  to  this 
people  great  truths,  intimately  connected  with  the  lasting  welfare  of  my 
country.  I  should,  indeed,  sink,  overwhelmed  and  subdued,  beneath  the 
appalling  magnitude  of  the  task  which  lies  before  me,  if  I  did  not  feel  my- 
self sustained  and  fortified  by  a  thorough  consciousness  of  the  justness  of 
the  cause  which  I  have  espoused,  and  by  a  persuasion,  I  hope  not  pre- 
sumptuous, that  it  has  the  approbation  of  that  Providence  who  has  so  often 
smiled  upon  these  United  States. 


440  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

Eight  years  ago,  it  was  my  painful  duty  to  present  to  the  other  House 
of  Congress  an  uuexaggerated  picture  of  the  general  distress  pervading  the 
whole  land.  We  must  all  yet  remember  some  of  its  frightful  features. 
We  all  know  that  the  people  were  then  oppressed,  and  borne  down  by  an 
enormous  load  of  debt ;  that  the  value  of  property  was  at  the  lowest  point 
of  depression ;  that  ruinous  sales  and  sacrifices  were  everywhere  made  of 
real  estate  ;  that  stop  laws,  and  relief  laws,  and  paper  money  were  adopted, 
to  save  the  people  from  impending  destruction;  that  a  deficit  in  the 
public  revenue  existed,  which  compelled  government  to  seize  upon,  and 
divert  from  its  legitmate  object,  the  appropriations  to  the  sinking  fund,  to 
redeem  the  national  debt :  and  that  our  commerce  and  navigation  were 
threatened  with  a  complete  paralysis.  In  short,  sir,  if  I  were  to  select  any 
term  of  seven  years  since  the  adoption  of  the  present  Constitution  which 
exhibited  a  scene  of  the  most  wide-spread  dismay  and  desolation,  it  would 
be  exactly  that  term  of  seven  years  which  immediately  preceded  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  tariff  of  1824. 

I  have  now  to  perform  the  more  pleasing  task  of  exhibiting  an  imperfect 
sketch  of  the  existing  state  of  the  unparalleled  prosperity  of  the  country. 
On  a  general  survey,  we  behold  cultivation  extended,  the  arts  flourishing, 
the  face  of  the  country  improved,  our  people  fully  and  profitably  employ- 
ed, and  the  public  countenance  exhibiting  tranquillity,  contentment,  and 
happiness.  And  if  we  descend  into  particulars,  we  have  the  agreeable 
contemplation  of  a  people  out  of  debt;  land  rising  slowly  in  value,  but  in 
a  secure  and  salutary  degree ;  a  ready  though  not  extravagant  market 
for  all  the  surplus  productions  of  our  industry ;  innumerable  flocks  and 
herds  browsing  and  gamboling  on  ten  thousand  hills  and  plains,  covered 
with  rich  and  verdant  glasses ;  our  cities  expanded,  and  whole  villages 
springing  up,  as  it  were,  by  enchantment ;  our  exports  and  imports  in- 
creased and  increasing  ;  our  tonnage,  foreign  and  coastwise,  swelling  and 
fully  occupied ;  the  rivers  of  our  interior  animated  by  the  perpetual  thun- 
der and  lightning  of  countless  steamboats  ;  the  currency  sound  and  abund- 
ant ;  the  public  debt  of  two  wars  nearly  redeemed  ;  and,  to  crown  all,  the 
public  treasury  overflowing,  embarrassing  Congress,  not  to  find  subjects  of 
taxation,  but  to  select  the  objects  which  shall  be  liberated  from  the  impost. 
If  the  term  of  seven  years  were  to  be  selected,  of  the  greatest  prosperity 
which  this  people  have  enjoyed  since  the  establishment  of  their  present 
Constitution,  it  would  be  exactly  that  period  of  seven  years  which  imme- 
diately followed  the  passage  of  the  tariff  of  1824. 

This  transformation  of  the  condition  of  the  country  from  gloom  and 
distress  to  brightness  and  prosperity,  has  been  mainly  the  work  of  Amer- 
ican legislation,  fostering  American  industry,  instead  of  allowing  it  to  be 
controlled  by  foreign  legislation,  cherishing  foreign  industry.  The  foes  of 
the  American  system,  in  1824,  with  great  boldness  and  confidence,  predicted, 
first,  the  ruin  of  the  public  revenue,  and  the  creation  of  a  necessity  to 
resort  to  direct  taxation ;  the  gentleman  from  South  Carolina  (General 


ON   THE    AMERICAN    SYSTEM.  441 

Hayne),  I  believe,  thought  that  the  tariff  of  1824  would  operate  a  reduc- 
tion of  revenue  to  the  large  amount  of  eight  millions  of  dollars  ;  secondly, 
the  destruction  of  our  navigation ;  thirdly,  the  desolation  of  commercial 
cities  ;  and,  fourthly,  the  augmentation  of  the  price  of  objects  of  consump- 
tion, aud  further  decline  in  that  of  the  articles  of  our  exports.  Every  pre- 
diction which  they  made  has  failed,  utterly  failed.  Instead  of  the  ruin  of 
the  public  revenue,  with  which  they  then  sought  to  deter  us  from  the 
adoption  of  the  American  system,  we  are  now  threatened  with  its  subver- 
sion, by  the  vast  amount  of  the  public  revenue  produced  by  that  system. 
Every  branch  of  our  navigation  has  increased.  As  to  the  desolation  of  our 
cities,  let  us  take,  as  an  example,  the  condition  of  the  largest  and  most 
commercial  of  all  of  them,  the  great  northern  capital.  I  have,  in  my 
hands,  the  assessed  value  of  real  estate  in  the  city  of  New  York,  from  1817 
to  1831.  This  value  is  canvassed,  contested,  scrutinized,  and  adjudged,  by 
the  proper  sworn  authorities.  It  is,  therefore,  entitled  to  full  credence. 
During  the  first  term,  commencing  with  181V,  and  ending  in  the  year  of 
the  passage  of  the  tariff  of  1824,  the  amount  of  the  value  of  real  estate 
was,  the  first  year,  fifty-seven  million  seven  hundred  and  ninety-nine  thous- 
and four  hundred  and  thirty-five  dollars,  and,  after  various  fluctuations  in 
the  intermediate  period,  it  settled  down  at  fifty-two  million  nineteen  thous- 
and seven  hundred  and  thirty  dollars,  exhibiting  a  decrease,  in  seven  years, 
of  five  million  seven  hundred  and  seventy-nine  thousand  seven  hundred 
and  five  dollars.  During  the  first  year,  of  1825,  after  the  passage  of  the 
tariff,  it  rose,  and,  gradually  ascending  throughout  the  whole  of  the  latter 
period  of  seven  years,  it  finally,  in  1831,  reached  the  astonishing  height 
of  ninety-five  million  seven  hundred  and  sixteen  thousand  four  hundred 
and  eighty-five  dollars  !  Now,  if  it  be  said,  that  this  rapid  growth  of  the 
city  of  New  York  was  the  effect  of  foreign  commerce,  then  it  was  not  cor- 
rectly predicted,  in  1824,  that  the  tariff  would  destroy  foreign  commerce, 
and  desolate  our  commercial  cities.  If,  on  the  contrary,  it  be  the  effect  of 
internal  trade,  then  internal  trade  can  not  be  justly  chargeable  with  the 
evil  consequences  imputed  to  it.  The  truth  is,  it  is  the  joint  effect  of  both 
principles,  the  domestic  industry  nourishing  the  foreign  trade,  and  the 
foreign  commerce  in  turn  nourishing  the  domestic  industry.  Nowhere 
more  than  in  New  Yoak  is  the  combination  of  both  principles  so  com- 
pletely developed.  In  the  progress  of  my  argument,  I  will  consider  the 
effect  upon  the  price  of  commodities  produced  by  the  American  system, 
and  show  that  the  very  reverse  of  the  prediction  of  its  foes,  in  1824,  ac- 
tually happened. 

While  we  thus  behold  the  entire  failure  of  all  that  was  foretold  against 
the  system,  it  is  a  subject  of  just  felicitation  to  its  friends,  that  all  their 
anticipations  of  its  benefits  have  been  fulfilled,  or  are  in  progress  of  fulfill- 
ment. The  honorable  gentleman  from  South  Carolina  has  made  an  allu- 
sion  to  a  speech  made  by  me,  in  1824,  in  the  other  House,  in  support  of 
the  tariff,  and  to  which,  otherwise,  I  should  not  have  particularly  referred. 


442  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

But  I  would  ask  any  one,  who  can  now  command  the  courage  to  peruse 
that  long  production,  what  principle  there  laid  down  is  not  true  ?  what 
prediction  theu  made  has  been  falsified  by  practical  experience  ? 

It  is  now  proposed  to  abolish  the  system,  to  which  we  owe  so  much  of 
the  public  prosperity,  and  it  is  urged  that  the  arrival  of  the  period  of  the 
redemption  of  the  public  debt  has  been  confidently  looked  to  as  presenting 
a  suitable  occasion  to  rid  the  country  of  the  evils  with  which  the  system 
is  alleged  to  be  fraught.  Not  an  inattentive  observer  of  passing  events,  I 
have  been  aware  that,  among  those  who  were  most  early  pressing  the  pay- 
ment of  the  public  debt,  and,  upon  that  ground,  were  opposing  appropria- 
tions to  other  great  interests,  there  were  some  who  cared  less  about  the 
debt  than  the  accomplishment  of  other  objects.  But  the  people  of  the 
United  States  have  not  coupled  the  payment  of  their  public  debt  with  the 
destruction  of  the  protection  of  their  industry  against  foreign  laws  and 
foreign  industry.  They  have  been  accustomed  to  regard  the  extinction  of 
the  public  debt  as  relief  from  a  burden,  and  not  as  the  infliction  of  a  curse. 
If  it  is  to  be  attended  or  followed  by  the  subvervion  of  the  American  sys- 
tem, and  an  exposure  of  our  establishments  and  our  productions  to  the 
unguarded  consequences  of  the  selfish  policy  of  foreign  powers,  the  pay- 
ment of  the  public  debt  will  be  the  bitterest  of  curses.  Its  fruit  will  be 
like  the  fruit 

"  Of  that  forbidden  tree  whose  mortal  taste 

Brought  death  into  the  world,  and  all  our  woe, 

With  loss  of  Eden." 

If  the  system  of  protection  be  founded  on  principles  erroneous  in  theory, 
pernicious  in  practice,  above  all,  if  it  be  unconstitutional,  as  is  alleged, 
it  ought  to  be  forthwith  abolished,  and  not  a  vestige  of  it  suffered  to  re- 
main. But  before  we  sanction  this  sweeping  denunciation,  let  us  look  a 
little  at  this  system,  its  magnitude,  its  ramifications,  its  duration,  and  the 
biffh  authorities  which  have  sustained  it.  We  shall  see  that  its  foes  will 
have  accomplished  comparatively  nothing,  after  having  achieved  their  pres- 
ent aim  of  breaking  down  our  iron-fouuderies,  our  woolen,  cotton,  and 
hemp  manufactories,  and  our  sugar  plantations.  The  destruction  of  these 
would,  undoubtedly,  lead  to  the  sacrifice  of  immense  capital,  the  ruin  of 
many  thousands  of  our  fellow-citizens,  and  incalculable  loss  to  the  whole 
community.  But  their  prostration  would  not  disfigure  nor  produce  greater 
effect  upon  the  whole  system  of  protection,  in  all  its  branches,  than  the 
destruction  of  the  beautiful  domes  upon  the  capitol  would  occasion  to  the 
magnificent  edifice  which  they  surmount.  Why,  sir,  there  is  scarcely 
an  interest,  scarcely  a  vocation  in  society,  which  is  not  embraced  by  the 
beneficence  of  this  system. 

It  comprehends  our  coasting  tonnage  and  trade,  from  which  all  foreign 
tonnage  is  absolutely  excluded. 

It  includes  all  our  foreign  tonnage,  with  the  inconsiderable  exception 
made  by  treaties  of  reciprocity  with  a  few  foreign  powers. 


ON   THE   AMERICAN   SYSTEM.  443 

It  embraces  our  fisheries,  and  all  our  hardy  and  enterprising-  fishermen. 

It  extends  to  almost  every  mechanic  art — to  tanners,  cordwainers,  tailors, 
cabinet-makers,  hatters,  tinners,  brass-workers,  clock-makers,  coach-makers 
tallow-chandlers,  trace-mikers,  rope-makers,  cork-cutters,  tobacconists, 
whip-makers,  paper-makers,  umbrella-makers,  glass-blowers,  stocking- 
weavers,  button-makers,  saddle  and  harness-makers,  cutlers,  brush-makers, 
bookbinders,  dairymen,  milk-farmers,  blacksmiths,  type-founders,  musical- 
instrument-makers,  basket-makers,  milliners,  potters,  chocolate-makers,  floor- 
cloth-makers, bonnet-makers,  hair-cloth-makers,  copper-smiths,  pencil- 
makers,  bellows-makers,  pocket-book-makers,  card-makers,  glue-makers, 
mustard-makers,  lumber-sawyers,  saw-makers,  scale-beam-makers,  scythe- 
makers,  wood-saw-makers,  and  many  others.  The  mechanics  enumerated, 
enjoy  a  measure  of  protection  adapted  to  their  several  conditions,  varying 
from  twenty  to  fifty  per  cent.  The  extent  and  importance  of  some  of  these 
artisans  may  be  estimated  by  a  few  particulars.  The  tanners,  curriers,  boot 
and  shoemakers,  and  other  workers  in  hides,  skins,  and  leather,  produce 
an  ultimate  value  per  annum  of  forty  millions  of  dollars ;  the  manufactu- 
rers of  hats  and  caps  produce  an  annual  value  of  fifteen  millions ;  the 
cabinet-makers,  twelve  millions ;  the  manufacturers  of  bonnets  and  hats 
for  the  female  sex,  lace,  artificial  flowers,  combs,  and  so  forth,  seven  mil- 
lions ;  and  the  manufacturers  of  glass,  five  millions. 

It  extends  to  all  lower  Louisiana,  the  delta  of  which  might  as  well  be 
submerged  again  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  from  which  it  has  been  a  gradual 
conquest,  as  now  to  be  deprived  of  the  protecting  duty  upon  its  great 
staple. 

It  affects  the  cotton  planter  himself,  and  the  tobacco  planter,  both  of 
whom  enjoy  protection. 

The  total  amount  of  the  capital  vested  in  sheep,  the  land  to  sustain 
them,  wool,  woolen  manufactures,  and  woolen  fabrics,  and  the  subsistence 
of  the  various  persons  directly  or  indirectly  employed  in  the  growth  and 
manufacture  of  the  article  of  wool,  is  estimated  at  one  hundred  and  sixty- 
seven  millions  of  dollars,  and  the  number  of  persons  at  one  hundred  and 
fifty  thousand. 

The  value  of  iron,  considered  as  a  raw  material,  and  of  its  manufactures, 
is  estimated  at  twenty-six  millions  of  dollars  per  annum.  Cotton  goods, 
exclusive  of  the  capital  vested  in  the  manufacture,  and  of  the  cost  of  the 
raw  material,  are  believed  to  amount,  annually,  to  about  twenty  millions 
of  dollars. 

These  estimates  have  been  carefully  made,  by  practical  men  of  undoubted 
character,  who  have  brought  .together  and  embodied  their  information. 
Anxious  to  avoid  the  charge  of  exaggeration,  they  have  sometimes  placed 
their  estimates  below  what  was  believed  to  be  the  actual  amount  of  these 
interests.  With  regard  to  the  quantity  of  bar  and  other  iron  annually  pro- 
duced, it  is  derived  from  the  known  works  themselves ;  and  I  know  some 
in  western  States  which  they  have  omitted  in  their  calculations. 


444  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY    CLAY. 

Such  are  some  of  the  items  of  this  vast  system  of  protection,  which  it 
is  now  proposed  to  abandon.     We  might  well  pause  and  contemplate,  if 
human  imagination  could  conceive  the  extent  of  mischief  and  ruin  from 
its  total  overthrow,  before  we  proceed  to  the  work  of  destruction.     Its  dur- 
ation is  worthy  also  of  serious  consideration.      Not  to  go   behind  the 
Constitution,  its  date  its  coeval  with  that  instrument.     It  began  on  the 
ever-memorable  4th  day  of  July — the  4th  day  of  July,  1789.     The  sec- 
ond act  which  stands   recorded    in  the  statute-book,    bearinsr    the  illus- 
trious  signature  of  George  Washington,  laid  the  corner-stone  of  the  whole 
system.     That  there  might  be  no  mistake  about  the  matter,  it  was  then 
solemnly  proclaimed  to  the  American  people  and  to  the  world  that  it  was 
necessary  for  "  the  encouragement  and  protection  of  manufactures,"  that 
duties  should  be  laid.     It  is  in  vain  to  urge  the  small  amount  of  the  meas- 
ure of  the  protection  then  extended.     The  great  principle  was  then  estab- 
lished by  the  fathers  of  the  Constitution,  with  the  father  of  his  country  at 
their  liead.     And  it  can  not  now  be   questioned,  that,  if  the  government 
had  not  then  been  new  and  the  subject  untried,  a  greater  measure  of  pro- 
tection   would    have  been   applied,  if  it  had  been  supposed  necessary. 
Shortly  after,  the  master  minds  of  Jefferson  and  Hamilton  were  brought 
to  act  on  this  interesting  subject.     Taking  views  of  it  appertaining  to  the 
departments  of  foreign  affairs  and  of  the  treasury,  which  they  respectively 
filled,  they  presented,  severally,  reports  which  yet  remain   monuments  of 
their  profound  wisdom,  and  came  to  the  same  conclusion  of  protection  to 
American  industry.     Mr.  Jefferson  argued  that  foreign  restrictions,  foreign 
prohibitions,  and  foreign  high  duties,  ought  to  be  met  at  home  by  Amer- 
ican restrictions,  American  prohibitions,  and  American  high   duties.     Mr. 
Hamilton,  surveying  the  entire  ground,  and  looking  at  the  inherent  nature 
of  the   subject,  treated  it  with  an  ability  which,  if  ever  equaled,  has  not 
been  surpassed,  and  earnestly  recommended  protection. 

The  wars  of  the  French  Revolution  commenced  about  this  period,  and 
streams  of  gold  poured  into  the  United  States  through  a  thousand  chan- 
nels, opened  or  enlarged  by  the  successful  commerce  which  our  neutrality 
enabled  us  to  prosecute.  We  forgot  or  overlooked,  in  the  general  pros- 
perity, the  necessity  of  encouraging  our  domestic  manufactures.  Then 
came  the  edicts  of  Napoleon,  and  the  British  orders  in  council;  and  our 
embargo,  non-intercourse,  non-importation,  and  war,  followed  in  rapid  suc- 
cession. These  national  measures,  amounting  to  a  total  suspension,  for  the 
period  of  their  duration,  of  our  foreign  commerce,  afforded  the  most  effica- 
cious encouragement  to  American  manufactures ;  and  accordingly  they 
everywhere  sprung  up.  While  these  measures  of  restriction  and  this  state 
of  war  continued,  the  manufacturers  were  stimulated  in  their  enterprise  by 
every  assurance  of  support,  by  public  sentiment,  and  by  legislative  re- 
solves. It  was  about  that  period  (1808)  that  South  Carolina  bore  her  high 
testimony  to  the  wisdom  of  the  policy,  in  an  act  of  her  Legislature,  the 
preamble  of  which,  now  before  me,  reads  : 


ON    THE   AMERICAN    SYSTEM.  445 

"  Whereas,  the  establishment  and  encouragement  of  domestic  manufactures 
is  conducive  to  the  interests  of  a  State,  by  adding  new  incentives  to  industry, 
and  as  being  the  means  of  disposing  to  advantage  the  surplus  productions  of 
the  agriculturist;  and  whereas,  in  the  present  unexampled  state  of  the  world, 
their  establishment  in  our  country  is  not  only  expedient,  but  politic,  in  render- 
ing us  independent  of  foreign  nations." 

The  Legislature,  not  being  competent  to  aftbrd  the  most  efficacious  aid, 
by  imposing  duties  on  foreign  rival  articles,  proceeded  to  incorporate  a 
company. 

Peace,  under  the  treaty  of  Ghent,  returned  in  1815,  but  there  did  not 
return  with  it  the  golden  days  which  preceded  the  edicts  leveled  at  our 
commerce  by  Great  Britain  and  France.  It  found  all  Europe  tranquilly 
resuming  the  arts  and  the  business  of  civil  life.  It  found  Europe  no  longer 
the  consumer  of  our  surplus,  and  the  employer  of  our  navigation,  but  ex- 
cluding, or  heavily  burdening,  almost  all  the  productions  of  our  agriculture, 
and  our  rivals  in  manufactures,  in  navigation,  and  in  commerce.  It  found 
our  country,  in  short,  in  a  situation  totally  different  from  all  the  past — new 
and  untried.  It  became  necessary  to  adapt  our  laws,  and  especially  our 
laws  of  impost,  to  the  new  circumstances  in  which  we  found  ourselves. 
Accordingly,  the  eminent  and  lamented  citizen,  then  at  the  head  of  the 
treasury  (Mr.  Dallas),  was  required,  by  a  resolution  of  the  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives, under  date  of  the  23d  of  February,  1815,  to  prepare  and 
report  to  the  succeeding  session  of  Congress,  a  system  of  revenue  conform- 
able with  the  actual  condition  of  the  country.  He  had  the  circle  of  a 
whole  year  to  perform  the  work,  consulted  merchants,  manufacturers,  and 
other  practical  men,  and  opened  an  extensive  correspondence.  The  report 
which  he  made  at  the  session  of  1816,  was  the  result  of  his  inquiries  and 
reflections,  and  embodies  the  principles  which  he  thought  applicable  to  the 
subject.  It  has  been  said,  that  the  tariff  of  1816  was  a  measure  of  mere 
revenue,  and  that  it  only  reduced  the  war  duties  to  a  peace  standard.  It 
is  true,  that  the  question  then  was,  how  much  and  in  what  way  should  the 
double  duties  of  the  war  be  reduced  ?  Now,  also,  the  question  is,  on  what 
articles  shall  the  duties  be  reduced  so  as  to  subject  the  amounts  of  the  fu- 
ture revenue  to  the  wants  of  the  government  ?  Then  it  was  deemed  an 
inquiry  of  the  first  importance,  as  it  should  be  now,  how  the  reduction 
should  be  made,  so  as  to  secure  proper  encoux-agement  to  our  domestic  in- 
dustry. That  this  was  a  leading  object  in  the  arrangement  of  the  tariff 
of  1816,  I  well  remember,  and  it  is  demonstrated  by  the  language  of  Mr. 
Dallas.     He  says,  in  his  report : 

"  There  are  few,  if  any  governments,  which  do  not  regard  the  establishment 
of  domestic  manufactures  as  a  chief  object  of  public  policy.  The  United  States 
have  always  so  regarded  it.  *  *  *  The  demands  of  the  country, 
while  the  acquisitions  of  supplies  from  foreign  nations  was  either  prohibited  or 
impracticable,  may  have  afforded  a  sufficient  inducement  for  this  investment  of 


446  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAT. 

capital,  and  this  application  of  labor ;  but  the  inducement,  in  its  necessary  ex- 
tent, must  fail  when  the  day  of  competition  returns.  Upon  that  change  in  the 
condition  of  the  country,  the  preservation  of  the  manufactures,  which  private 
citizens  under  favorable  auspices  have  constituted  the  property  of  the  nation, 
becomes  a  consideration  of  general  policy,  to  be  resolved  by  a  recollection  of 
past  embarrassments ;  by  the  certainty  of  an  increased  difficulty  of  reinstat- 
ing, upon  any  emergency,  the  manufactures  which  shall  be  allowed  to  perish  and 
pass  away,"  and  so  forth. 

The  measure  of  protection  which  he  proposed  was  not  adopted,  in  regard 
to  some  leading  articles,  and  there  was  great  difficulty  in  ascertaining  what 
it  ought  to  have  been.  But  the  principle  was  then  distinctly  asserted  and 
fully  sanctioned. 

The  subject  of  the  American  system  was  again  brought  up  in  1820,  by 
the  bill  reported  by  the  chairman  of  the  committee  of  manufactures,  now 
a  member  of  the  bench  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  and 
the  principle  was  successfully  maintained  by  the  representatives  of  the  peo- 
ple ;  but  the  bill  which  they  passed  was  defeated  iu  the  Senate.  It  was 
revived  in  1824,  the  whole  ground  carefully  and  deliberately  explored, 
and  the  bill  then  introduced,  receiving  all  the  sanctions  of  the  Constitution, 
became  the  law  of  the  land.  An  amendment  of  the  system  was  proposed 
in  1828,  to  the  history  of  which  I  refer  with  no  agreeable  recollections. 
The  bill  of  that  year,  in  some  of  its  provisions,  was  framed  on  principles 
directly  adverse  to  the  declared  wishes  of  the  friends  of  the  policy  of  pro- 
tection. I  have  heard  without  vouching  for  the  fact,  that  it  was  so  framed, 
upon  the  advice  of  a  prominent  citizen  now  abroad,  with  the  view  of  ulti- 
mately defeating  the  bill,  and  with  assurances  that,  being  altogether  unac- 
ceptable to  the  friends  of  the  American  system,  the  bill  would  be  lost.  Be 
that  as  it  may,  the  most  exceptionable  features  of  the  bill  were  stamped 
upon  it,  against  the  earnest  remonstrances  of  the  friends  of  the  system,  by 
the  votes  of  southern  members,  upon  a  principle,  I  think,  as  unsound  in 
legislation  as  it  is  reprehensible  in  ethics.  The  bill  was  passed,  notwith- 
standing, it  having  been  deemed  better  to  take  the  bad  along  with  the 
good  which  it  contained,  than  reject  it  altogether.  Subsequent  legislation 
has  corrected  the  error  then  perpetrated,  but  still  that  measure  is  vehe- 
mently denounced  by  gentlemen  who  contributed  to  make  it  what  it  was. 

Thus,  sir,  has  this  great  system  of  protection  been  gradually  built,  stone 
upon  stone,  and  step  by  step,  from  the  4th  of  July,  1*789,  down  to  the  pres- 
ent period.  In  every  stage  of  its  progress  it  has  received  the  deliberate 
sanction  of  Congress.  A  vast  majority  of  the  people  of  the  United  States 
has  approved  and  continue  to  approve  it.  Every  chief  magistrate  of  the 
United  States,  from  Washington  to  the  present,  in  some  form  or  other,  has 
given  to  it  the  authority  of  his  name ;  and,  however  the  opinions  of  the 
existing  president  are  interpreted  south  of  Mason  and  Dixon's  line,  on  the 
north  they  are  at  least  understood  to  favor  the  establishment  of  a  judicious 
tariff. 


ON   THE   AMERICAN    SYSTEM.  447 

The  question,  therefore,  which  we  are  now  called  upon  to  determine,  is 
not,  whether  we  shall  establish  a  new  and  doubtful  system  of  policy,  just 
proposed,  and  for  the  first  time  presented  to  our  consideration,  but  whether 
we  shall  break  down  and  destroy  a  long  established  system,  patiently  and 
carefully  built  up  and  sanctioned,  during  a  series  of  years,  again  and  again, 
by  the  nation  and  its  highest  and  most  revered  authorities.  And  are  we 
not  bound  deliberately  to  consider  whether  we  can  proceed  to  this  work  of 
destruction  without  a  violation  of  the  public  faith  ?  The  people  of  the 
United  States  have  justly  supposed  that  the  policy  of  protecting  their  in- 
dustry against  foreign  legislation  and  foreign  industry  was  fully  settled, 
not  by  a  single  act,  but  by  repeated  and  deliberate  acts  of  government, 
performed  at  distant  and  frequent  intervals.  In  full  confidence  that  the 
policy  was  firmly  and  unchangeably  fixed,  thousands  upon  thousands  have 
invested  then-  capital,  purchased  a  vast  amount  of  real  and  other  estate, 
made  permanent  establishments,  and  accommodated  their  industry.  Can 
we  expose  to  utter  and  irretrievable  ruin  this  countless  multitude,  without 
justly  incurring  the  reproach  of  violating  the  national  faith  ? 

I  shall  not  discuss  the  constitutional  question.  Without  meaning  any 
disrespect  to  those  who  raise  it,  if  it  be  debatable,  it  has  been  sufficiently 
debated.  The  gentleman  from  South  Carolina  suffered  it  to  fall  unnoticed 
from  his  budget ;  and  it  was  not  until  after  he  had  closed  his  speech  and 
resumed  his  seat,  that  it  occurred  to  him  that  he  had  forgotten  it,  when  he 
again  addressed  the  Senate,  aud,  by  a  sort  of  protestation  against  any  con- 
clusion from  his  silence,  put  forward  the  objection.  The  recent  free-trade 
convention  at  Philadelphia,  it  is  well  known,  were  divided  on  the  question  ; 
and  although  the  topic  is  noticed  in  their  address  to  the  public,  they  do 
not  avow  their  own  belief  that  the  American  system  is  unconstitutional, 
but  represent  that  such  is  the  opinion  of  respectable  portions  of  the  Amer- 
ican people.  Another  address  to  the  people  of  the  United  States,  from  a 
high  source,  during  the  past  year,  treating  this  subject,  does  not  assert  the 
opinion  of  the  distinguished  author,  but  states  that  of  others  to  be,  that  it 
is  unconstitutional.  From  which  I  infer  that  he  did  not  himself  believe  it 
to  be  unconstitutional. 

[Here  the  Vice-president  *  interposed,  and  remarked,  that,  if  the  senator 
from  Kentucky  alluded  to  him,  he  must  say  that  his  opinion  was,  that  the  meas- 
ure wras  unconstitutional.] 

When,  sir,  I  contended  with  you,  side  by  side,  and  with  perhaps  less 
zeal  than  you  exhibited,  in  1816, 1  did  not  understand  you  then  to  consider 
the  policy  forbidden  by  the  constitution. 

[The  Vice-president  again  interposed,  and  said  that  the  Constitutional  ques- 
tion was  not  debated  at  that  time,  and  that  he  had  never  expressed  an  opinion 
contrary  to  that  now  intimated.] 

*  Mr.  Calhoun. 


448  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

I  give  way  with  pleasure  to  these  explanations,  which  I  hope  will  al- 
ways be  made  when  I  say  any  thing  bearing  on  the  individual  opinions  of 
the  chair.  I  know  the  delicacy  of  the  position,  and  sympathize  with  the 
incumbent,  whoever  he  may  be.  It  is  true,  the  question  was  not  debated 
in  1816  ;  and  why  not?  Because  it  was  not  debatable  ;  it  was  then  be- 
lieved not  fairly  to  arise.  It  never  has  been  made  as  a  distinct,  substantial, 
and  leading  point  of  objection.  It  never  was  made  until  the  discussion  of 
the  tariff  of  1824,  when  it  was  rather  hinted  at  as  against  the  spirit  of  the 
Constitution,  than  formally  announced  as  being  contrary  to  the  provisions 
of  that  instrument.  What  was  not  dreamed  of  before,  or  in  1816,  and 
scarcely  thought  of  in  1824,  is  now  made,  by  excited  imaginations,  to  as- 
sume the  imposing  form  of  a  serious  constitutional  barrier. 

Such  are  the  origin,  duration,  extent,  and  sanctions  of  the  policy  which 
we  are  now  called  upon  to  subvert.     Its  beneficial  effects,  although  they 
may  vary  in  degree,  have  been  felt  in  all  parts  of  the  Union.     To  none, 
I  verily  believe,  has  it  been  prejudicial.     In  the  North,  everywhere,  testi- 
monials are  borne  to  the  high  prosperity  which  it  has  diffused.     There,  all 
branches  of  industry  are  animated  and  flourishing.    Commerce,  foreign  and 
domestic,  active  ;  cities  and  towns  springing  up,  enlarging  and  beautifying ; 
navigation  fully  and  profitably  employed,  and  the  whole  face  of  the  coun- 
try smiling  with  improvement,  cheerfulness,  and  abundance.     The  gentle- 
man from  South  Carolina  has  supposed  that  we  in  the  West  derive  no 
advantages  from  this  system.     He  is  mistaken.     Let  him  visit  us,  and  he 
will  find,  from  the  head  of  La  Belle  Riviere,  at  Pittsburg,  to  America,  at 
its  mouth,  the  most  rapid  and  gratifyiug  advances.     He  will  behold  Pitts- 
burg  itself,  Wheeling,  Portsmouth,  Maysville,  Cincinnati,  Louisville,  and 
numerous  other  towns,  lining  and  ornamenting  the  banks  of  the  noble 
river,  daily  extending  their  limits,  and  prosecuting,  with  the  greatest  spirit 
and  profit,  numerous  branches  of  the  manufacturing  and  mechanic  arts. 
If  he  will  go  into  the  interior,  iu  the  State  of  Ohio,  he  will  there  perceive 
the  most  astonishing  progress  in  agriculture,  in  the  useful  arts,  and  in  all 
the  improvements  to  which  they  both  directly  conduce.     Then  let  him 
cross  over  into  my  own,  my  favorite  State,  and  contemplate  the  spectacle 
which  is  there  exhibited.     He  will  perceive  numerous  villages,  not  large, 
but  neat,  thriving,  and  some  of  them  highly  ornamented  ;  many  manufac- 
tories of  hemp,  cotton,  wool,  and  other  articles.     In  various  parts  of  the 
country,  and  especially  in  the  Elkhorn  region,  an  endless  succession  of 
natural  parks ;  the  forests  thinned ;  fallen  trees  and  undergrowth  cleared 
away ;  large  herds  and  flocks  feeding  on  luxuriant  grasses  ;  and  interspersed 
with  comfortable,  sometimes  elegant  mansions,  surrounded  by  extensive 
lawns.     The  honorable  gentleman  from  South  Carolina  says,  that  a  profit- 
able trade  was  carried  on  from  the  West,  through  the  Seleuda  gap,  in 
mules,  horses,  and  other  live  stock,  which  has  been  checked  by  the  opera- 
tion of  the  tariff.     It  is  true  that  such  a  trade  was  carried  on  between 
Kentucky  and  South  Carolina,  mutually  beneficial  to  both  parties;  but, 


ON  THE   AMERICAN   SYSTEM.  449 

several  years  ago,  resolutions,  at  popular  meetings,  in  Carolina,  were 
adopted,  not  to  purchase  the  produce  of  Kentucky,  by  way  of  punishment 
for  her  attachment  to  the  tariff.  They  must  have  supposed  us  as  stupid  as 
the  sires  of  one  of  the  descriptions  of  the  stock  of  which  that  trade  con- 
sisted, if  they  imagined  that  their  resolutions  would  affect  our  principles. 
Our  drovers  cracked  their  whips,  blew  their  horns,  and  passed  the  Scleuda 
gap  to  other  markets,  where  better  humor  existed,  and  equal  or  greater 
profits  were  made.  I  have  heard  of  your  successor  in  the  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives, Mr.  President,  this  anecdote  :  that  he  joined  in  the  adoption 
of  those  resolutions,  but  when,  about  Christmas,  he  applied  to  one  of  his 
South  Carolina  neighbors,  to  purchase  the  regular  supply  of  pork  for  the 
ensuing  year,  he  fouud  that  he  had  to  pay  two  prices  for  it ;  and  he  de- 
clared, if  that  were  the  patriotism  on  which  the  resolutions  were  based,  he 
would  not  conform  to  them,  and,  in  point  of  fact,  laid  in  his  annual  stock 
of  pork  by  purchase  from  the  first  passing  Kentucky  drover.  The  trade, 
now  partially  resumed,  was  maintained  by  the  sale  of  western  productions, 
on  the  one  side,  and  Carolina  money  on  the  other.  From  that  condition 
of  it  the  gentleman  from  South  Carolina  might  have  drawn  this  conclusion, 
that  an  advantageous  trade  may  exist,  although  one  of  the  parties  to  it 
pays  in  specie  for  the  production  which  he  purchases  from  the  other ;  and 
consequently  that  it  does  not  follow,  if  we  did  not  purchase  British  fabrics, 
that  it  might  not  be  the  interest  of  England  to  purchase  our  raw  material 
of  cotton.  The  Kentucky  drover  received  the  South  Carolina  specie,  or, 
taking  bills,  or  the  evidences  of  deposit  in  the  banks,  carried  these  home, 
and  disposing  of  them  to  the  merchant,  he  brought  out  goods,  of  foreign 
or  domestic  manufacture,  in  return.  Such  is  the  circuitous  nature  of  trade 
and  remittance,  which  no  nation  understands  better  than  Great  Britain. 

Nor  has  the  system  which  has  been  the  parent  source  of  so  much  bene- 
fit to  other  parts  of  the  Union,  proved  injurious  to  the  cotton-growing 
country.  I  can  not  speak  of  South  Carolina  itself,  where  I  have  never 
been,  with  so  much  certainty  ;  but  of  other  portions  of  the  Union  in  which 
cotton  is  grown,  especially  those  bordering  on  the  Mississippi,  I  can  con- 
fidently speak.  If  cotton-planting  is  less  profitable  than  it  was,  that  is  the 
result  of  increased  production ;  but  I  believe  it  to  be  still  the  most  profit- 
able investment  of  capital  of  any  branch  of  business  in  the  United  States. 
And  if  a  committee  was  raised,  with  power  to  send  for  persons  and  papers, 
I  take  it  upon  myself  to  say,  that  such  would  be  the  result  of  the  inquiry. 
In  Kentucky,  I  know  many  individuals  who  have  their  cotton  plantations 
below,  and  retain  their  residence  in  that  State,  where  they  remain  during 
the  sickly  season ;  and  they  are  all,  I  believe,  without  exception,  doing  well. 
Others,  tempted  by  their  success,  are  constantly  engaging  in  the  business, 
while  scarcely  any  come  from  the  cotton  region  to  engage  in  western 
agriculture.  A  friend,  now  in  my  eye,  a  member  of  this  body,  upon  a  cap- 
ital of  less  than  seventy  thousand  dollars,  invested  in  a  plantation  and 
slaves,  made,  the  year  before  last,  sixteen  thousand  dollars.     A  member  of 

29 


450  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY    CLAY. 

the  other  House,  I  understand,  who,  without  removing  himself,  sent  some 
of  his  slaves  to  Mississippi,  made  last  year  about  twenty  per  cent.  Two 
friends  of  mine,  in  the  latter  State,  whose  annual  income  is  from  thirty  to 
sixty  thousand  dollars,  being  desirous  to  curtail  their  business,  have  offered 
estates  for  sale  which  they  are  willing  to  show,  by  regular  vouchers  of  re- 
ceipt and  disbursement,  yield  eighteen  per  cent,  per  annum.  One  of  my 
most  opulent  acquaintances,  in  a  county  adjoining  that  in  which  I  reside, 
having  married  in  Georgia,  has  derived  a  large  portion  of  his  wealth  from 
a  cotton  estate  there  situated. 

The  loss  of  the  tonnage  of  Charleston,  which  has  been  dwelt  on,  does 
not  proceed  from  the  tariff;  it  never  had  a  very  large  amount,  and  it  has 
not  been  able  to  retain  what  it  had,  in  consequence  of  the  operation  of  the 
principle  of  free  trade  on  its  navigation.  Its  tonnage  has  gone  to  the  more 
enterprising  and  adventurous  tars  of  the  northern  States,  with  whom  those 
of  the  city  of  Charleston  could  not  maintain  a  successful  competition,  in 
the  freedom  of  the  coasting  trade  existing  between  the  different  parts  of 
the  Union.  That  this  must  be  the  true  cause,  is  demonstrated  by  the  fact, 
that,  however  it  may  be  with  the  port  of  Charleston,  our  coasting  tonnage, 
generally,  is  constantly  increasing.  As  to  the  foreign  tonnage,  about  one 
half  of  that  which  is  engaged  in  the  direct  trade  between  Charleston  and 
Great  Britain,  is  English  ;  proving  that  the  tonnage  of  South  Carolina  can 
not  maintain  itself  in  a  competition,  under  the  free  and  equal  navigation 
secured  by  our  treaty  with  that  power. 

When  gentlemen  have  succeeded  in  their  design  of  an  immediate  or  grad- 
ual destruction  of  the  American  system,  what  is  their  substitute  ?  Free 
trade  !  Free  trade !  The  call  for  free  trade  is  as  unavailing,  as  the  cry 
of  a  spoiled  child  in  its  nurse's  arms,  for  the  moon,  or  the  stars  that  glitter 
in  the  firmament  of  heaven.  It  never  has  existed,  it  never  will  exist. 
Trade  implies  at  least  two  parties.  To  be  free,  it  should  be  fair,  equal,  and 
reciprocal.  But  if  we  throw  our  ports  wide  open  to  the  admission  of 
foreign  productions,  free  of  all  duty,  what  ports  of  any  other  foreign  nation 
shall  we  find  open  to  the  free  admission  of  our  surplus  produce  ?  We  may 
break  down  all  barriers  to  free  trade  on  our  part,  but  the  work  will  not  be 
complete,  until  foreign  powers  shall  have  removed  theirs.  There  would 
be  freedom  on  one  side,  and  restriction,  prohibitions,  and  exclusions,  on  the 
other.  The  bolts  and  the  bars  and  the  chains  of  all  other  nations  will 
remain  undisturbed.  It  is,  indeed,  possible,  that  our  industry  and  com- 
merce would  accommodate  themselves  to  this  unequal  and  unjust  state  of 
things  ;  for,  such  is  the  flexibility  of  our  nature,  that  it  bends  itself  to  all 
circumstances.  The  wretched  prisoners  incarcerated  in  a  jail,  after  a  long 
time,  becomes  reconciled  to  his  solitude,  and  regularly  notches  down  the 
passing  davs  of  his  confinement. 

Gentlemen  deceive  themselves.  It  is  not  free  trade  that  they  are  recom- 
mending to  our  acceptance.  It  is,  in  effect,  the  British  colonial  system 
that  we  are  invited  to  adopt ;  and,  if  their  policy  prevail,  it  will  lead  sub- 


ON   THE   AMERICAN   SYSTEM.  451 

stantially  to  the  recolonization  of  these  States  under  the  commercial  do- 
minion of  Great  Britain.  And  whom  do  we  find  some  of  the  principal 
supporters,  out  of  Congress,  of  this  foreign  system  ?  Mr.  President,  there 
are  some  foreigners  who  always  remain  exotics,  and  never  become  natural- 
ized in  our  country ;  while  happily,  there  are  many  others  who  readily 
attach  themselves  to  our  principles  and  our  institutions.  The  honest, 
patient,  and  industrious  German,  readily  unites  with  our  people ;  estab- 
lishes himself  upon  some  of  our  fat  lands,  fills  his  capacious  barn,  and  en- 
joys in  tranquillity  the  abundant  fruits  which  his  diligence  gathers  around 
him  ;  always  ready  to  fly  to  the  standard  of  his  adopted  country,  or  of  its 
laws,  when  called  by  the  duties  of  patriotism.  The  gay,  the  versatile,  the 
philosophic  Frenchman,  accommodating  himself  cheerfully  to  all  the  vicissi- 
tudes of  life,  incorporates  himself  without  difficulty,  in  our  society.  But, 
of  all  foreigners,  none  amalgamate  themselves  so  quickly  with  our  people 
as  the  natives  of  the  Emerald  isle.  In  some  of  the  visions  which  have  pass- 
ed through  my  imagination,  I  have  supposed  that  Ireland  was  originally 
part  and  parcel  of  this  continent,  and  that  by  some  extraordinary  convul- 
sion of  nature,  it  was  torn  from  America,  and,  drifting  across  the  ocean, 
was  placed  in  the  unfortunate  vicinity  of  Great  Britain.  The  same  open- 
heartedness ;  the  same  generous  hospitality ;  the  same  careless  and  uncal- 
culating  indifference  about  human  life  ;  characterize  the  inhabitants  of  both 
countries.  Kentucky  has  been  sometimes  called  the  Ireland  of  America.  > 
And  I  have  no  doubt,  that  if  the  current  of  emigration  were  reversed,  and 
set  from  America  upon  the  shores  of  Europe  instead  of  bearing  from  Eu- 
rope to  America,  every  American  emigrant  to  Ireland  would  there  find,  as 
every  Irish  emigrant  here  finds,  a  hearty  welcome  and  a  happy  home  ! 

But  sir,  the  gentleman  to  whom  I  am  about  to  allude,  although  long  a 
resident  of  this  country,  has  no  feelings,  no  attachments,  no  sympathies,  no 
principles,  in  common  with  our  people.  Nearly  fifty  years  ago,  Pennsyl- 
vania took  him  to  her  bosom,  and  warmed,  and  cherished,  and  honored 
him  ;*  and  how  does  he  manifest  his  gratitude  ?  By  aiming  a  vital  blow  at 
a  system  endeared  to  her  by  a  thorough  conviction  that  it  is  indispensable 
to  her  prosperity.  He  has  filled,  at  home  and  abroad,  some  of  the  highest 
offices  under  this  government,  during  thirty  years,  and  he  is  still  at  heart 
an  alien.  The  authority  of  his  name  has  been  invoked,  and  the  labors  of 
his  pen,  in  the  form  of  a  memorial  to  Congress,  have  been  engaged,  to 
overthrow  the  American  system,  and  to  substitute  the  foreign.  Go  home 
to  your  native  Europe,  and  there  inculcate  upon  her  sovereigns  your  Uto- 
pian doctrines  of  free  trade,  and  when  you  have  prevailed  upon  them  to  un- 
seal their  ports,  and  freely  admit  the  produce  of  Pennsylvania  and  other 
States,  come  back,  aud  we  shall  be  prepared  to  become  converts,  and  to 
adopt  your  faith. 

A  Mr.  Sarchet  also  makes  no  inconsiderable  figure  in  the  common  attack 
upon  our  system.     I  do  not  know  the  man,  but  I  understand  he  is  an  un- 

*  Mr.  Gallatin. 


452  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

naturalized  emigrant  from  the  island  of  Guernsey,  situated  in  the  channel 
which  divides  France  and  England.  The  principal  business  of  the  inhab- 
itants is  that  of  driving  a  contraband  trade  with  the  opposite  shores,  and 
Mr.  Sarchet,  educated  in  that  school,  is,  I  have  been  told,  chiefly  engaged 
in  employing  his  wits  to  elude  the  operation  of  our  revenue  laws,  by  intro- 
ducing articles  at  less  rates  of  duty  than  they  are  justly  chargeable  with, 
which  he  effects  by  varying  the  denominations,  or  slightly  changing  their 
forms.  This  man,  at  a  former  session  of  the  Senate,  caused  to  be  presented 
a  memorial,  signed  by  some  one  hundred  and  fifty  pretended  workers  in 
iron.  Of  these,  a  gentleman  made  a  careful  inquiry  and  examination,  and 
he  ascertained  that  there  were  only  about  ten  of  the  denomination  repre- 
sented ;  the  rest  were  tavern-keepers,  porters,  merchants'  clerks,  hackney 
coachmen,  and  so  forth.  I  have  the  most  respectable  authority,  in  black 
and  white,  for  this  statement. 

[Here  General  Hayne  asked,  who  ?  and  was  he  a  manufacturer  ?  Mr.  Clay 
replied,  Colonel  Murray,  of  New  York,  a  gentleman  of  the  highest  standing  for 
honor,  probity,  and  veracity ;  that  he  did  not  know  whether  he  was  a  manu- 
facturer or  not,  but  the  gentleman  might  take  him  as  one.] 

Whether  Mr.  Sarchet  got  up  the  late  petition  presented  to  the  Senate, 
from  the  journeymen  tailors  of  Philadelphia,  or  not,  I  do  not  know.  But 
I  should  not  be  surprised  if  it  were  a  movement  of  his,  and  if  we  should 
find  that  he  has  cabbaged  from  other  classes  of  society  to  swell  out  the 
number  of  signatures. 

To  the  facts  manufactured  by  Mr.  Sarchet,  and  the  theories  by  Mr.  Gal- 
latin, there  was  yet  wanting  one  circumstance  to  recommend  them  to  favor- 
able consideration,  and  that  was,  the  authority  of  some  high  name.  There 
was  no  difficulty  in  obtaining  one  from  a  British  repository.  The  honor- 
able gentleman  has  cited  a  speech  of  my  Lord  Goderich,  addressed  to  the 
British  Parliament,  in  favor  of  free  trade,  and  full  of  deep  regret  that  old 
England  could  not  possibly  conform  her  practice  of  rigorous  restriction 
and  exclusion  to  her  liberal  doctrines  of  unfettered  commerce,  so  earnestly 
recommended  to  foreign  powers.  Sir,  I  know  my  Lord  Goderich  very 
well,  although  my  acquaintance  with  him  was  prior  to  his  being  summoned 
to  the  British  House  of  Peers.  We  both  sio-ned  the  convention  between 
the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  of  1815.  He  is  an  honorable  man, 
frank,  possessing  but  ordinary  business  talents,  about  the  stature  and  com- 
plexion of  the  honorable  gentleman  from  South  Carolina,  a  few  years  older 
than  he,  and  every  drop  of  blood  running  in  his  veins  being  pure  and  un- 
adulterated Anglo-Saxon  blood.  If  he  were  to  live  to  the  age  of  Methu- 
selah, he  could  not  make  a  speech  of  such  ability  and  eloquence  as  that 
which  the  gentleman  from  South  Carolina  recently  delivered  to  the  Senate ; 
and  there  would  be  much  more  fitness  in  my  Lord  Goderich  making  quota- 
tions from  the  speech  of  the  honorable  gentleman,  than  his  quoting,  as 
authority,  the  theoretical  doctrines  of  my  Lord  Goderich.     We  are  too 


ON   THE  AMERICAN  SYSTEM.  453 

much  in  the  habit  of  looking  abroad,  not  merely  for  manufactured  articles, 
but  for  the  sanction  of  high  names  to  support  favorite  theories.  I  have 
seen  and  closely  observed  the  British  Parliament,  and,  without  derogating 
from  its  justly  elevated  character,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying,  that  in 
all  the  attributes  of  order,  dignity,  patriotism,  and  eloquence,  the  Amer- 
ican Congress  would  not  sutler,  in  the  smallest  degree,  by  a  comparison 
with  it. 

I  dislike  this  resort  to  authority,  and  especially  foreign  and  interested 
authority,  for  the  support  of  principles  of  public  policy.  I  would  greatly 
prefer  to  meet  gentlemen  upon  the  broad  ground  of  fact,  of  experience,  and 
of  reason;  but,  since  they  will  appeal  to  British  names  and  authority,  I 
feel  myself  compelled  to  imitate  their  bad  example.  Allow  me  to  quote 
from  a  speech  of  a  member  of  the  British  Parliament,  bearing  the  same 
family  name  with  my  Lord  Goderich,  but  whether  or  not  a  relation  of  his, 
I  do  not  know.  The  member  alluded  to,  was  arguing  against  the  violation 
of  the  treaty  of  Methuen — that  treaty  not  less  fatal  to  the  interests  of 
Portugal  than  would  be  the  system  of  gentlemen  to  the  best  interests  of 
America — and  he  went  on  to  say : 

"  It  was  idle  for  us  to  endeavor  to  persuade  other  nations  to  join  with  us  in 
adopting  the  principles  of  what  was  called  '  free  trade.'  Other  nations  knew,  as 
well  as  the  noble  lord  opposite,  and  those  who  acted  with  him,  what  we  meant 
by  '  free  trade,'  was  nothing  more  nor  less  than,  by  means  of  the  great  advan- 
tages we  enjoyed,  to  get  a  monopoly  of  all  their  markets  for  our  manufactures, 
and  to  prevent  them,  one  and  all,  from  ever  becoming  manufacturing  nations. 
When  the  system  of  reciprocity  and  free  trade  had  been  proposed  to  a  French 
embassador,  his  remark  was,  that  the  plan  was  excellent  in  theory,  but,  to  make 
it  fair  in  practice,  it  would  be  necessary  to  defer  the  attempt  to  put  it  in  execu- 
tion for  half  a  century,  until  France  should  be  on  the  same  footing  with  Great 
Britain,  in  marine,  in  manufactures,  in  capital,  and  the  many  other  peculiar  ad- 
vantages which  it  now  enjoyed.  The  policy  that  France  acted  on  was  that  of 
encouraging  its  native  manufactures,  and  it  was  a  wise  policy ;  because,  if  it 
were  freely  to  admit  our  manufactures,  it  would  speedily  be  reduced  to  the  rank 
of  an  agricultural  nation ;  and,  therefore,  a  poor  nation,  as  all  must  be  that  de- 
pend exclusively  upon  agriculture.  America  acted,  too,  upon  the  same  princi- 
ple with  France.  America  legislated  for  futurity — legislated  for  an  increasing 
population.  America,  too,  was  prospering  under  this  system.  In  twenty 
years,  America  would  be  independent  of  England  for  manufactures  altogether. 
*  *  *  But  since  the  peace,  France,  Germany,  America,  and  all  the  other 
countries  of  the  world,  had  proceeded  upon  the  principle  of  encouraging  and 
protecting  native  manufactures." 

But  I  have  said  that  the  system  nominally  called  "free  trade,"  so 
earnestly  and  eloquently  recommended  to  our  adoption,  is  a  mere  revival 
of  the  British  colonial  system,  forced  upon  us  by  Great  Britain  during  the 
existence  of  our  colonial  vassalage.  The  whole  system  is  fully  explained 
and  illustrated  in  a  work  published  as  far  back  as  the  year  1750,  entitled 
"  The  Trade  and  Navigation  of  Great  Britain  Considered,  by  Joshua  Gee," 


454  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

with  extracts  from  which  I  have  been  furnished  by  the  diligent  researches 
of  a  friend.  It  will  be  seen  from  these,  that  the  South  Carolina  policy  now 
is  identical  with  the  long-cherished  policy  of  Great  Britain,  which  remains 
the  same  as  it  was  when  the  thirteen  colonies  were  part  of  the  British 
empire.     In  that  work  the  author  contends  : 

"  First,  that  manufactures,  in  American  colonies,  should  be  discouraged  or 
prohibited. 

"  Great  Britain,  with  its  dependencies,  is  doubtless  as  well  able  to  subsist 
within  itself,  as  any  nation  in  Europe.  We  have  an  enterprising  people,  fit  for 
all  the  arts  of  peace  and  war.  We  have  provisions  in  abundance,  and  those  of 
the  best  sort,  and  are  able  to  raise  sufficient  for  double  the  number  of  inhabit- 
ants. We  have  the  very  best  materials  for  clothing,  and  want  nothing,  either 
for  use,  or  even  for  luxury,  but  what  we  have  at  home,  or  might  have  from  our 
colonies ;  so  that  we  might  make  such  an  intercourse  of  trade  among  ourselves, 
or  between  us  and  them,  as  would  maintain  a  vast  navigation.  But  we  ought 
always  to  keep  a  watchful  eye  over  our  colonies,  to  restrain  thorn  from  setting 
up  any  of  the  manufactures  which  are  carried  on  in  Great  Britain ;  and  any 
such  attempts  should  be  crushed  in  the  beginning;  for  if  they  are  suf- 
fered to  grow  up  to  maturity,  it  will  be  difficult  to  suppress  them.  Pages 
177,  178,  179. 

"  Our  colonies  are  much  in  the  same  state  Ireland  was  in,  when  they  began 
the  woolen  manufactory,  and  as  their  numbers  increase,  will  fall  upon  manu- 
factures for  clothing  themselves,  if  due  care  be  not  taken  to  find  employment 
for  them,  in  raising  such  productions  as  may  enable  them  to  furnish  themselves 
with  all  their  necessaries  from  us." 

Then  it  was  the  object  of  the  British  economists  to  adapt  the  means  or 
wealth  of  the  colonists  to  the  supply  required  by  their  necessities,  and  to 
make  the  mother  country  the  source  of  that  supply.  Now  it  seems  the 
policy  is  only  so  far  to  be  reversed,  that  we  must  continue  to  import  nec- 
essaries from  Great  Britain,  in  order  to  enable  her  to  purchase  raw  cotton 
from  us. 

"  I  should,  therefore,  think  it  worthy  the  care  of  the  government,  to  endeav- 
or, by  all  possible  means,  to  encourage  them  in  raising  silk,  hemp,  flax,  iron 
[only  pig,  to  be  hammered  in  England],  potash,  and  so  forth,  by  giving  them 
competent  bounties  in  the  beginning,  and  sending  over  judicious  and  skillful 
persons  at  the  public  charge,  to  assist  and  instruct  them  in  the  most  proper 
methods  of  management,  which,  in  my  apprehension,  would  lay  a  foundation 
for  establishing  the  most  profitable  trade  of  any  we  have.  And  considering  the 
commanding  situation  of  our  colonies  along  the  sea-coast,  the  great  convenience 
of  navigable  rivers  in  all  of  them,  the  cheapness  of  land,  and  the  easiness  of 
raising  provisions,  great  numbers  of  people  would  transport  themselves  thither, 
to  settle  upon  such  improvements.  Now,  as  people  have  been  filled  with  fears 
that  the  colonies,  if  encouraged  to  raise  rough  materials,  would  set  up  for  them- 
selves, a  little  regulation  would  remove  all  those  jealousies  out  of  the  way. 
They  have  never  thrown  or  wove  any  silk,  as  yet,  that  we  have  heard  of. 
Therefore  if  a  law  was  made  to  prohibit  the  use  of  every  throwster's  mill,  of 


ON    THE    AMERICAN    SYSTEM.  455 

doubling  or  hosliug  silk  with  any  machine  whatever,  they  would  then  send  it 
to  us  raw.  And  as  they  will  have  the  providing  rough  materials  to  themselves, 
so  shall  we  have  the  manufacturing  of  them.  If  encouragement  be  given  for 
raising  hemp,  flax,  and  so  forth,  doubtless  they  Will  soon  begin  to  manufacture, 
if  not  prevented.  Therefore,  to  stop  the  progress  of  any  such  manufacture,  it, 
is  proposed,  that  no  weaver  shall  have  liberty  to  set  up  any  looms,  without  first 
registering,  at  an  office  kept  for  that  purpose,  and  the  name  and  place  of  abode 
of  any  journeyman  that  shall  work  for  him.  But  if  any  particular  inhabitant 
shall  be  inclined  to  have  any  linen  or  woolen  made  of  their  own  spinning, 
they  should  not  be  abriged  of  the  same  liberty  that  they  now  make  use  of^ 
namely,  to  carry  to  a  weaver  (who  shall  be  licensed  by  the  governor),  and 
have  it  wrought  up  for  the  use  of  the  family,  but  not  to  be  sold  to  any 
person  in  a  private  manner,  nor  exposed  to  any  market  or  fair,  upon  pain  of 
forfeiture. 

"  And,  inasmuch  as  they  have  been  supplied  with  all  their  manufactures  from 
hence,  except  what  is  used  in  building  of  ships,  and  other  country  work,  one 
half  of  our  exports  being  supposed  to  be  in  nails — a  manufacture  which  they 
allow  has  never  hitherto  been  carried  on  among  them — it  is  proposed  they  shall, 
for  time  to  come,  never  erect  the  manufacture  of  any,  under  the  size  of  a  two- 
shilling  nail,  horse-nails  excepted ;  that  all  slitting  mills  and  engines,  for  drawing 
wire,  or  weaving  stockings,  be  put  down,  and  that  every  smith  who  keeps  a 
common  forge  or  shop,  shall  register  his  name  and  place  of  abode,  and  the  name 
of  every  servant  which  he  shall  employ,  which  license  shall  be  renewed  once 
every  year,  and  pay  for  the  liberty  of  working  at  such  trade.  That  all  negroes 
shall  be  prohibited  from  weaving  either  linen  or  woolen,  or  spinning  or  comb- 
ing of  wool,  or  working  at  any  manufacture  of  iron,  further  than  making  it  into 
pig  or  bar  iron.  That  they  also  be  prohibited  from  manufacturing  hats,  stock- 
ings, or  leather  of  any  kind.  This  limitation  will  not  abridge  the  planters  of  any 
privilege  they  now  enjoy.  On  the  contrary,  it  will  turn  their  industry  to  pro- 
moting and  raising  those  rough  materials." 

The  author  then  proposes,  that  the  board  of  trade  and  plantations  should 
be  furnished  with  statistical  accounts  of  the  various  permitted  manufac- 
tures, to  enable  them  to  encourage  or  depress  the  industry  of  the  colonists, 
and  prevent  the  danger  of  interference  with  British  industry. 

"  It  is  hoped  that  this  method  would  allay  the  heat  that  some  people  have 
shown  for  destroying  the  iron-works  on  the  plantations,  and  pulling  down  all 
their  forges,  taking  away,  in  a  violent  manner,  their  estates  and  properties,  pre- 
venting the  husbandmen  from  getting  their  plowshares,  carts,  and  other  utensils 
mended,  destroying  the  manufacture  of  ship-building,  by  depriving  them  of  the 
liberty  of  making  bolts,  spikes,  and  other  things  proper  for  carrying  on  that 
work,  by  which  article  returns  are  made  for  purchasing  our  woolen  manufac- 
tures."    Pages  87,  88,  89. 

Such  is  the  picture  of  colonists  dependent  upon  the  mother  country  for 
their  necessary  supplies,  drawn  by  a  writer  who  was  not  among  the  num- 
ber of  those  who  desired  to  debar  them  the  means  of  buildino-  a  vessel, 
erecting  a  forge,  or  mending  a  plowshare,  but  who  was  willing  to  promote 


456  SPEECHES   OF    HENKY    CLAY. 

their  growth  and  prosperity  as  far  as  was  consistent  with  the  paramount 
iuterests  of  the  manufacturing  or  parent  state. 

"  Secondly,  the  advantages  to  Great  Britain,  from  keeping  the  colonists  de- 
pendent on  her  for  their  essential  supplies. 

"  If  we  examine  into  the  circumstanstances  of  the  inhabitants  of  our  planta- 
tions, and  our  own,  it  will  appear,  that  not  one  fourth  part  of  their  product  re- 
dounds to  their  own  profit ;  for,  out  of  all  that  comes  here,  they  only  carry 
back  clothing,  and  other  accommodations  for  their  families,  all  of  which  is  of  the 
merchandise  and  manufacture  of  this  kingdom." 


"o 


After  showing  how  this  system  tends  to  concentrate  all  the  surplus  of 
acquisition  over  absolute  expenditure  in  England,  he  says  : 

"  All  these  advantages  we  receive  by  the  plantations,  besides  the  mortgages 
on  the  planters'  estates,  and  the  high  interest  they  pay  us,  which  is  very  con- 
siderable ;  and  therefore  very  great  care  ought  to  be  taken  in  regulating  all  the 
affairs  of  the  colonists,  that  the  planters  be  not  put  under  too  many  difficulties, 
but  encouraged  to  go  on  cheerfully. 

"  New  England,  and  the  northern  colonies,  have  not  commodities  and  pro- 
ducts enough  to  send  us,  in  return,  for  purchasing  their  necessary  clotliing,  but 
are  under  very  great  difficulties,  and  therefore  any  ordinary  sort  sell  with 
them.  And  when  they  have  grown  out  of  fashion  with  us,  they  are  new-fash- 
ioned enough  there." 

Sir,  I  can  not  go  on  with  this  disgusting  detail.  Their  refuse  goods, 
their  old  shop-keepers,  their  cast-off  clothes  good  enough  for  us  !  Was 
there  ever  a  scheme  more  artfully  devised,  by  which  the  energies  and 
faculties  of  one  people  should  be  kept  down,  and  rendered  subservient  to 
the  pride,  and  the  pomp,  and  the  power  of  another  ?  The  system  then 
proposed  differs  only  from  that  which  is  now  recommended  in  one  partic- 
ular— that  was  intended  to  be  enforced  by  power  ;  this  would  not  be  less 
effectually  executed  by  the  force  of  circumstances.  A  gentleman  in  Boston 
(Mr.  Lee),  the  agent  of  the  free-trade  convention,  from  whose  exhaustless 
mint  there  is  a  constant  issue  of  reports,  seems  to  envy  the  blessed  condi- 
tion of  dependent  Canada,  when  compared  to  the  oppressed  state  of  this 
Union  ;  and  it  is  a  fair  inference  from  the  view  which  he  presents,  that  he 
would  have  us  hasten  back  to  the  golden  days  of  that  colonial  bondage, 
which  is  so  well  depicted  in  the  work  from  which  I  have  been  quoting. 
Mr.  Lee  exhibits  two  tabular  statements,  in  one  of  which  he  presents  the 
high  duties  which  he  represents  to  be  paid  in  the  ports  of  the  LTnited 
States,  and  in  the  other,  those  which  are  paid  in  Canada,  generally  about 
two  per  centum  ad  valorem.  But  did  it  not  occur  to  him,  that  the  duties 
levied  in  Canada  are  paid  chiefly  in  British  manufactures,  or  on  articles 
passing  from  one  part  to  another  of  a  common  empire  ?  and  that,  to  pre- 
sent a  parallel  case  in  the  United  States,  he  ought  to  have  shown,  that  im- 
portations made  into  one  State  from  another,  which  are  now  free,  are  sub- 
ject to  the  same  or  higher  duties  than  are  paid  in  Canada  ? 


ON   THE    AMERICAN    SYSTEM.  457 

I  will  now,  Mr.  President,  proceed  to  a  more  particular  consideration  of 
the  arguments  urged  against  the  protective  system,  and  an  inquiry  into  its 
practical  operation,  especially  on  the  cotton-growing  country.  And  as  1 
wish  to  stale  and  meet  the  argument  fairly,  I  invite  the  correction  of  my 
statement  of  it,  if  necessary.  It  is  alleged  that  the  system  operates  prej- 
udicially to  the  cotton  planter,  by  diminishing  the  foreign  demand  for  his 
staple  ;  that  we  can  not  sell  to  Great  Britain  unless  we  buy  from  her ; 
that  the  import  duty  is  equivalent  to  an  export  duty,  and  falls  upon  the 
cotton  grower ;  that  South  Carolina  pays  a  disproportionate  quota  of  the 
public  revenue  ;  that  an  abandonment  of  the  protective  policy  would  lead 
to  an  augmentation  of  our  exports,  of  an  amount  not  less  than  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  millions  of  dollars ;  and,  finally,  that  the  South  can  not 
partake  of  the  advantages  of  manufacturing,  if  there  be  any.  Let  us 
examine  these  various  propositions  in  detail.  First,  that  the  foreign  demand 
for  cotton  is  diminished,  and  that  we  can  not  sell  to  Great  Britain  unless 
we  buy  from  her.  The  demand  of  both  our  great  foreign  customers,  is 
constantly  and  annually  increasing.  It  is  true,  that  the  ratio  of  the  in- 
crease may  not  be  equal  to  that  of  production  ;  but  this  is  owing  to  the 
fact,  that  the  power  of  producing  the  raw  material  is  much  greater,  and  is, 
therefore,  constantly  in  advance  of  the  power  of  consumption.  A  single 
fact  will  illustrate.  The  average  produce  of  laborers  engaged  in  the  culti- 
vation of  cotton,  may  be  estimated  at  five  bales,  or  fifteen  hundred  weight 
to  the  hand.  Supposing  the  annual  average  consumption  of  each  indivi- 
dual who  uses  cotton  cloth,  to  be  five  pounds,  one  hand  can  produce  enough 
of  the  raw  material  to  clothe  three  hundred. 

The  argument  comprehends  two  errors,  one  of  fact  and  the  other  of 
principle.  It  assumes  that  we  do  not  in  fact  purchase  of  Great  Britain. 
What  is  the  true  state  of  the  case  ?  There  are  certain,  but  very  few  articles 
which  it  is  thought  sound  policy  requires  that  we  should  manufacture  at 
home,  and  on  these  the  tariff  operates.  But  with  respect  to  all  the  rest, 
and  much  the  larger  number  of  articles  of  taste,  fashion,  and  utility,  they 
are  subject  to  no  other  than  revenue  duties,  and  are  freely  introduced.  I 
have  before  me  from  the  Treasury  a  statement  of  our  imports  from  En- 
gland, Scotland,  and  Ireland,  including  ten  years,  preceding  the  last,  and 
three  quarters  of  the  last  year,  from  which  it  will  appear  that,  although 
there  are  some  fluctuations  in  the  amount  of  the  different  years,  the 
largest  amount  imported  in  any  one  year  has  been  since  the  tariff  of  1824, 
and  that  the  last  year's  importation,  when  the  returns  of  the  fourth  quarter 
shall  be  received,  will  probably  be  the  greatest  in  the  whole  term  of  eleven 
years. 

Now,  if  it  be  admitted  that  there  b  a  less  amount  of  the  protected 
articles  imported  from  Great  Britain,  she  may  be,  and  probably  is,  com- 
pensated for  the  deficiency,  by  the  increased  consumption  in  America  of 
the  articles  of  her  industry  not  falling  within  the  scope  of  the  policy  of 
our  protection.     The  establishment  of  manufactures  among  us  excites  the 


458  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

creation  of  wealth,  and  this  gives  new  powers  of  consumption,  wliich  are 
gratified  by  the  purchase  of  foreign  objects.  A  poor  nation  can  never  be 
a  great  consuming  nation.  Its  poverty  will  limit  its  consumption  to  bare 
subsistence. 

The  erroneous  principle  which  the  argument  includes,  is,  that  it  de- 
volves on  us  the  duty  of  taking  care  that  Great  Britain  shall  be  enabled  to 
purchase  from  us  without  exacting  from  Great  Britain  the  corresponding 
duty.  If  it  be  true  on  one  side  that  nations  are  bound  to  shape  their 
policy  in  reference  to  the  ability  of  foreign  powers,  it  must  be  true  on  both 
sides  of  the  Atlantic.  And  this  reciprocal  obligation  ought  to  be  em- 
phatically regarded  toward  the  nation  supplying  the  raw  material,  by  the 
manufacturing  nation,  because  the  industry  of  the  latter  gives  four  or  five 
values  to  what  had  been  produced  by  the  industry  of  the  former. 

But,  does  Great  Britain  practice  toward  us  upon  the  principles  which 
we  are  now  required  to  observe  in  regard  to  her  ?  The  exports  to  the 
United  Kingdom,  as  appears  from  the  same  treasury  statement  just  adverted 
to,  during  eleven  years,  from  1820  to  1831,  and  exclusive  of  the  fourth 
quarter  of  the  last  year,  fall  short  of  the  amouut  of  imports  by  upward 
of  forty-six  millions  of  dollars,  and  the  total  amount,  when  the  returns  of 
that  quarter  are  received,  will  exceed  fifty  millions  of  dollars  !  It  is  sur- 
prising how  we  have  been  able  to  sustain,  for  so  long  a  time,  a  trade  so 
very  unequal.  We  must  have  been  absolutely  ruined  by  it,  if  the  unfavor- 
able balance  had  not  been  neutralized  by  more  profitable  commerce  with 
other  parts  of  the  world.  Of  all  nations,  Great  Britain  has  the  least  cause 
to  complain  of  *he  trade  between  the  two  countries.  Our  imports  from 
that  single  power  are  nearly  one  third  of  the  entire  amount  of  our  import- 
ations from  all  foreign  countries  together.  Great  Britain  constantly  acts 
on  the  maxim  of  buying  only  what  she  wants  and  can  not  produce,  and 
selling  to  foreign  nations  the  utmost  amount  she  can.  In  conformity  with 
this  maxim,  she  excludes  articles  of  prime  necessity,  produced  by  us,  equally 
if  not  more  necessary  than  any  of  her  industry  which  we  tax,  although  the 
admission  of  those  articles  would  increase  our  ability  to  purchase  from  her, 
according-  to  the  argument  of  gentlemen. 

If  we  purchased  still  less  from  Great  Britain  than  we  do,  and  our  con- 
ditions were  reversed,  so  that  the  value  of  her  imports  from  this  country 
exceeded  that  of  her  exports  to  it,  she  would  only  then  be  compelled  to 
do  what  we  have  so  long  done,  and  what  South  Carolina  does,  in  her  trade 
with  Kentucky,  make  up  for  the  unfavorable  balance  by  trade  with  other 
places  and  countries.  How  does  she  now  dispose  of  the  one  hundred  and 
sixty  millions  of  dollars'  worth  of  cotton  fabrics,  which  she  annually  sells  ? 
Of  that  amount  the  United  States  do  not  purchase  five  per  centum. 
What  becomes  of  the  other  ninety-five  per  centum  ?  Is  it  not  sold  to 
other  powers,  and  would  not  their  markets  remain,  if  ours  were  totally 
shut?  Would  she  uot  continue,  as  she  now  finds  it  her  interest,  to  pur- 
chase the  raw  material  from  us,  to  supply  those  markets  ?     Would  she  be 


ON   THE    AMERICAN    SYSTEM.  459 

guilty  of  the  folly  of  depriving  herself  of  markets  to  the  amount  of  up- 
ward of  one  hundred  and  fifty  millions  of  dollars,  because  we  refused  her 
a  market  for  some  eight  or  ten  millions  ? 

But  if  there  were  a  diminution  of  the  British  demand  for  cotton  equal 
to  the  loss  of  a  market  for  the  few  British  fabrics  which  are  within  the 
scope  of  our  protective  policy,  the  question  would  still  remain,  whether 
the  cotton-planter  is  not  amply  indemnified  by  the  creation  of  additional 
demand  elsewhere  ?  With  respect  to  the  cotton -grower,  it  is  the  totality 
of  the  demand,  and  not  its  distribution,  which  affects  his  interests.  If  any 
system  of  policy  will  augment  the  aggregate  of  the  demand,  that  system 
is  favorable  to  his  interests,  although  its  tendency  may  be  to  vary  the  the- 
ater of  the  demand.  It  could  not,  for  example,  be  injurious  to  him,  if, 
instead  of  Great  Britain  continuing  to  receive  the  entire  quantity  of  cotton 
which  she  now  does,  two  or  three  hundred  thousand  bales  of  it  were  taken 
to  the  other  side  of  the  channel,  and  increased  to  that  extent  the  French 
demand.  It  would  be  better  for  him,  because  it  is  always  better  to  have 
several  markets  than  one.  Now  if,  instead  of  a  transfer  to  the  opposite 
side  of  the  channel,  of  those  two  or  three  hundred  thousand  bales,  they 
are  transported  to  the  northern  States,  can  that  be  injurious  to  the  cotton- 
grower  ?  Is  it  not  better  for  him  ?  Is  it  not  better  to  have  a  market  at 
home,  unaffected  by  war,  or  other  foreign  causes,  for  that  amount  of  his 
staple  ? 

If  the  establishment  of  American  manufactures,  therefore,  had  the  sole 
effect  of  creating  a  new  and  an  American  demand  for  cotton,  exactly  to  the 
same  extent  in  which  it  lessened  the  British  demand,  there  would  be  no 
just  cause  of  complaint  against  the  tariff.  The  gain  in  one  place  would 
precisely  equal  the  loss  in  the  other.  But  the  true  state  of  the  matter  is 
much  more  favorable  to  the  cotton-grower.  It  is  calculated  that  the  cot- 
ton manufactories  of  the  United  States  absorb  at  least  two  hundred  thou- 
sand bales  of  cotton  annually.  I  believe  it  to  be  more.  The  two  ports  of 
Boston  and  Providence  alone  received  during  the  last  year  nearly  one  hun- 
dred and  ten  thousand  bales.  The  amount  is  annually  increasing.  The  raw 
material  of  that  two  hundred  thousand  bales  is  worth  six  millions,  and 
there  is  an  additional  value  conferred  by  the  manufacturer  of  eighteen 
millions ;  it  being  generally  calculated  that,  in  such  cotton  fabrics  as  we 
are  in  the  habit  of  making,  the  manufacture  constitutes  three  fourths  of 
the  value  of  the  article.  If,  therefore,  these  twenty-four  millions  worth 
of  cotton  fabrics  were  not  made  in  the  United  States,  but  were  manufac- 
tured in  Great  Britain,  in  order  to  obtain  them,  we  should  have  to  add  to 
the  already  enormous  disproportion  between  the  amount  of  our  imports 
and  exports,  in  the  trade  with  Great  Britain,  the  further  sum  of  twenty- 
four  millions,  or,  deducting  the  price  of  the  raw  material,  eighteen  mil- 
lions !  And  will  gentlemen  tell  me  how  it  would  be  possible  for  this  coun- 
try to  sustain  such  a  ruinous  trade  ?  From  all  that  portion  of  the  United 
States  lying  north  and  east  of  James  river,  and  west  of  the  mountains, 


460  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

Great  Britian  receives  comparatively  nothing.  How  would  it  be  possible 
for  the  inhabitants  of  that  largest  portion  of  our  territory,  to  supply  them- 
selves with  cotton  fabrics,  if  they  were  brought  from  England  exclusively  ? 
They  could  not  do  it.  But  for  the  existence  of  the  American  manufacture 
they  would  be  compelled  greatly  to  curtail  their  supplies,  if  not  absolutely 
to  suffer  iu  their  comforts.  By  its  existence  at  home,  the  circle  of  those 
exchanges  is  created,  which  reciprocally  diffuses  among  all  who  are  em- 
braced within  it  the  productions  of  their  respective  industry.  The  cotton- 
grower  sells  the  raw  material  to  the  manufacturer ;  he  buys  the  iron,  the 
bread,  the  meal,  the  coal,  and  the  countless  number  of  objects  of  his  con- 
sumption from  his  fellow-citizens,  and  they  in  turn  purchase  his  fabrics. 
Putting  it  upon  the  ground  merely  of  supplying  those  with  necessary 
articles  who  could  not  otherwise  obtain  them,  ought  there  to  be  from  any 
quarter  an  objection  to  the  only  system  by  which  that  object  can  be  ac- 
complished ?  But  can  there  be  any  doubt  with  those  who  will  reflect, 
that  the  actual  amount  of  cotton  consumed  is  increased  by  the  home 
manufacture  ?  The  main  argument  of  gentlemen  is  founded  upon  the  idea 
of  mutual  ability  resulting  from  mutual  exchanges.  They  would  furnish 
an  ability  to  foreign  nations  by  purchasing  from  them,  aud  I,  to  our  own 
people,  by  exchanges  at  home.  If  the  American  manufacture  were  discon- 
tinued, and  that  of  England  were  to  take  its  place,  how  would  she  sell  the 
additional  quantity  of  twenty-four  millions  of  cotton  goods,  which  we  now 
make  ?  To  us  ?  That  has  been  shown  to  be  impracticable.  To  other 
foreign  nations  ?  She  has  already  pushed  her  supplies  to  them  to  the  ut- 
most extent.  The  ultimate  consequence  would  then  be,  to  diminish  the 
total  consumption  of  cotton,  to  say  nothing  now  of  the  reduction  of  price 
that  would  take  place  by  throwing  into  the  ports  of  Great  Britain  the  two 
hundred  thousand  bales,  which,  no  longer  being  manufactured  in  the 
United  States,  would  go  thither. 

Second,  that  the  import  duty  is  equivalent  to  an  export  duty,  and  falls 
on  the  producer  of  cotton. 

The  framers  of  our  Constitution,  by  granting  the  power  to  Congress  to 
lay  imposts,  aud  prohibiting  that  of  laying  an  export  duty,  manifested  that 
they  did  not  regard  them  as  equivalent.  Nor  does  the  common  sense  of 
mankind.  An  export  duty  fastens  upon,  and  incorporates  itself  with,  the 
article  on  which  it  is  laid.  The  article  can  not  escape  from  it — it  pursues 
and  follows  it,  wherever  the  article  goes  ;  and  if,  in  the  foreign  market,  the 
supply  is  above  or  just  equal  to  the  demand,  the  amount  of  the  export 
duty  will  be  a  clear  deduction  to  the  exporter  from  the  price  of  the  arti- 
cle. But  an  import  duty  on  a  foreign  article  leaves  the  exporter  of  the 
domestic  article  free,  first,  to  import  specie ;  secondly,  goods  which  are 
free  from  the  protecting  duty  ;  or,  thirdly,  such  goods  as,  being  charge- 
able with  the  protecting  duty,  he  can  sell  at  home,  and  throw  the  duty 
on  the  consumer. 

But,  it  is  confidently  argued  that  the  import  duty  falls  upon  the  grower 


ON    THE    AMERICAN    SYSTEM.  401 

of  cotton ;  and  the  case  has  been  put  in  debate,  and  again  and  again  in 
conversation,  of  the  South  Carolina  planter,  who  exports  one  hundred 
bales  of  cotton  to  Liverpool,  exchanges  them  for  one  hundred  bales  of 
merchandise,  and  when  he  brings  them  home,  being  compelled  to  leave  at 
the  custom-house  forty  bales  in  the  form  of  duties.  The  argument  is 
founded  on  the  assumption  that  a  duty  of  forty  per  centum  amounts  to  a 
subtraction  of  forty  from  the  one  hundred  bales  of  merchandise.  The 
first  objection  to  it  is,  that  it  supposes  a  case  of  barter,  which  never  occurs. 
If  it  be  replied,  that  it  nevertheless  occurs  in  the  operations  of  commerce, 
the  answer  would  be  that,  since  the  export  of  Carolina  cotton  is  chiefly 
made  by  New  York  or  foreign  merchants,  the  loss  stated,  if  it  really  ac- 
crued, would  fall  upon  them,  and  not  upon  the  planter.  But,  to  test  the 
correctness  of  the  hypothetical  case,  let  us  suppose  that  the  duty,  instead 
of  forty  per  centum,  should  be  one  hundred  and  fifty,  which  is  asserted  to 
be  the  duty  in  some  cases.  Then,  the  planter  would  not  only  lose  the 
whole  hundred  bales  of  merchandise,  which  he  had  gotten  for  his  hundred 
bales  of  cotton,  but  he  would  have  to  purchase,  with  other  means,  an  ad- 
ditional fifty  bales,  in  order  to  enable  him  to  pay  the  duties  accruing  on  the 
proceeds  of  the  cotton.  Another  answer  is,  that  if  the  producer  of  cotton 
in  America,  exchanged  against  English  fabrics,  pays  the  duty,  the  producer 
of  those  fabrics  also  pays  it,  and  then  it  is  twice  paid.  Such  must  be  the 
consequence,  unless  the  principle  is  true  on  one  side  of  the  Atlantic,  and 
false  on  the  other.  The  true  answer  is,  that  the  exporter  of  an  article,  if 
he  invests  its  proceeds  in  a  foreign  market,  takes  care  to  make  the  invest- 
ment in  such  merchandise  as,  when  brought  home,  he  can  sell  with  a  fair 
profit ;  and,  consequently,  the  consumer  would  pay  the  original  cost  and 
charges,  and  profit. 

Third.  The  next  objection  to  the  American  system  is,  that  it  subjects 
South  Carolina  to  the  payment  of  an  undue  proportion  of  the  public  rev- 
enue. The  basis  of  this  objection  is  the  assumption,  shown  to  have  been 
erroneous,  that  the  producer  of  the  exports  from  this  country  pays  the 
duty  ou  its  imports,  instead  of  the  consumer  of  those  imports.  The 
amount  which  South  Carolina  really  contributes  to  the  public  revenue,  no 
more  than  that  of  any  other  State,  can  be  precisely  ascertained.  It  de- 
pends upon  her  consumption  of  articles  paying  duties,  and  we  may  make 
an  approximation  sufficient  for  all  practical  purposes.  The  cotton  planters 
of  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi  with  whom  I  am  acquainted,  generally  ex- 
pend but  one  third  of  their  income  in  the  support  of  their  families  and 
plantations.  On  this  subject  I  hold  in  my  hands  a  statement  from  a  friend 
of  mine,  of  great  accuracy,  and  a  member  of  the  Senate.  According  to 
this  statement  in  a  crop  of  ten  thousand  dollars,  the  expense  may  fluctu- 
ate between  two  thousand  eight  hundred  dollars  and  three  thousand  two 
hundred  dollars.  Of  this  sum,  about  one  fourth,  from  seven  to  eight  hun- 
dred dollars,  may  be  laid  out  in  articles  paying  the  protective  duty ;  the 
residue  is  disbursed  for  provisions,  mules,  horses,  oxen,  wages  of  overseer, 


462  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

etc.  Estimating  the  exports  of  South  Carolina  at  eight  millions,  one  third 
is  two  millions  six  hundred  and  sixty-six  thousand  six  hundred  and  sixty- 
six  dollars  ;  of  which  one, fourth  will  be  six  hundred  and  sixty-six  thousand 
six  hundred  and  sixty-six  and  two  thirds  dollars.  Now,  supposing  the 
protecting  duty  to  be  fifty  per  centum,  and  that  it  all  enters  into  the  price 
of  the  article,  the  amount  paid  by  South  Carolina  would  only  be  three 
hundred  and  thirty-three  thousand  three  hundred  and  thirty-three  and  one 
third  dollars.  But  the  total  revenue  of  the  United  States  may  be  stated  at 
twenty  millions,  of  which  the  proportion  of  South  Carolina,  whatever 
standard,  whether  of  wealth  or  population,  be  adopted,  would  be  about 
one  million.  Of  course  on  this  view  of  the  subject,  she  actually  pays 
only  about  one  third  of  her  fair  and  legitimate  share.  I  repeat,  that  I 
have  no  personal  knowledge  of  the  habits  of  actual  expenditure  in  South 
Carolina ;  they  may  be  greater  than  I  have  stated,  in  respect  to  other  parts 
of  the  cotton  country  ;  but  if  they  are,  that  fact  does  not  arise  from  any 
defect  in  the  system  of  public  policy. 

Fourth.  An  abandonment  of  the  American  system,  it  is  urged,  would 
lead  to  an  addition  to  our  exjjorts  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  millions  of  dol- 
lars. The  amount  of  one  hundred  and  fiftv  millions  of  cotton,  in  the  raw 
state,  would  produce  four  hundred  and  fifty  millions  in  the  manufactured 
state,  supposing  no  greater  measure  of  value  be  communicated,  in  the 
manufactured  form,  than  that  which  our  industry  imparts.  Now,  sir, 
where  would  markets  be  found  for  this  vast  addition  to  the  supply?  Not 
in  the  United  States,  certainly,  nor  in  any  other  quarter  of  the  globe,  En- 
gland having  already  everywhere  pressed  her  cotton  manufactures  to  the 
utmost  point  of  repletion.  We  must  look  out  for  new  worlds,  seek  for  new 
and  unknown  races  of  mortals,  to  consume  this  immense  increase  of  cotton 
fabrics. 

[General  Hayne  said,  that  he  did  not  mean  that  the  increase  of  one  hundred 
and  fifty  millions  to  the  amount  of  our  exports  would  be  of  cotton  alone,  but  of 

other  articles.] 

What  other  articles  ?  Agricultural  produce — bread-stuffs,  beef  and  pork, 
and  so  forth  ?  Where  shall  we  find  markets  for  them  ?  Whither  shall  we 
go  ?  To  what  country,  whose  ports  are  not  hermetically  sealed  against 
their  admission  ?  Break  down  the  home  market  and  you  are  without  re- 
source. Destroy  all  other  interests  in  the  country,  for  the  imaginary  pur- 
pose of  advancing  the  cotton-planting  interest,  and  you  inflict  a  positive 
injury,  without  the  smallest  practical  benefit  to  the  cotton  planter.  Could 
Charleston,  or  the  whole  South,  when  all  other  markets  are  prostrated,  or 
shut  against  the  reception  of  the  surplus  of  our  farmers,  receive  that  sur- 
plus ?  Would  they  buy  more  than  they  might  want  for  their  own  con- 
sumption ?  Could  they  find  markets  which  other  parts  of  the  Union  could 
not  ?  Would  gentlemen  force  the  freemen  of  all  north  of  James  river,  east 
and  west,  like  the  miserable  slave,  on  the  Sabbath  day,  to  repair  to  Charles- 


ON   THE   AMERICAN   SYSTEM.  463 

ton,  with  a  turkey  under  his  arm,  or  a  pack  upon  his  back,  and  beg  the 
clerk  of  some  English  or  Scotch  merchant,  living  in  his  gorgeous  palace, 
or  rolling  in  his  splendid  coach  in  the  streets,  to  exchange  his  "  truck"  for 
a  bit  of  flannel  to  cover  his  naked  wife  and  children !  No  !  I  am  sure 
that  I  do  no  more  than  justice  to  their  hearts,  when  I  believe  that  they 
would  reject  what  I  believe  to  be  the  inevitable  effects  of  their  policy- 
Fifth.  But  it  is  contended,  in  the  last  place,  that  the  South  can  not, 
from  physical  and  other  causes,  engage  in  the  manufacturing  arts.  I  deny 
the  premises,  and  I  deny  the  conclusion.  I  deny  the  fact  of  inability  ;  and, 
if  it  existed,  I  deny  the  conclusion,  that  we  must,  therefore,  break  down 
our  manufactures,  and  nourish  those  of  foreign  countries.  The  South  pos- 
sesses, in  an  extraordinary  degree,  two  of  the  most  important  elements  of 
manufacturing  industry — water-power  and  labor.  The  former  gives  to  our 
whole  country  a  most  decided  advantage  over  Great  Britain.  But  a  single 
experiment,  stated  by  the  gentleman  from  South  Carolina,  in  which  a  faith- 
less slave  put  the  torch  to  a  manufacturing  establishment,  has  discouraged 
similar  enterprises.  We  have  in  Kentucky  the  same  description  of  popula- 
tion, and  we  employ  them,  almost  exclusively,  in  many  of  our  hemp  manu- 
factories. A  neighbor  of  mine,  one  of  our  most  opulent  and  respectable 
citizens,  has  had  one,  two,  if  not  three,  manufactories  burned  by  incen- 
diaries ;  but  he  persevered,  and  his  perseverance  has  been  rewarded  with 
wealth.  We  found  that  it  was  less  expensive  to  keep  night-watches  than 
to  pay  premiums  for  insurance,  and  we  employed  them. 

Let  it  be  supposed,  however,  that  the  South  can  not  manufacture  ;  must 
those  parts  of  the  Union  which  can,  be  therefore  prevented  ?  Must  we 
support  those  of  foreign  countries  ?  I  am  sure  that  injustice  would  be 
done  to  the  generous  and  patriotic  nature  of  South  Carolina,  if  it  were  be- 
lieved that  she  envied  or  repined  at  the  success  of  other  portions  of  the 
Union  in  branches  of  industry  to  which  she  might  happen  not  to  be 
adapted.  Throughout  her  whole  career  she  has  been  liberal,  national, 
hicfh-minded. 

The  fiiends  of  the  American  system  have  been  reminded  by  the  honor- 
able gentleman  from  Maryland  (General  Smith),  that  they  are  the  majority, 
and  he  has  admonished  them  to  exercise  their  power  in  moderation.  The 
majority  ought  never  to  trample  upon  the  feelings,  or  violate  the  just 
rights  of  the  minority.  They  ought  never  to  triumph  over  the  fallen,  nor 
to  make  any  but  a  temperate  and  equitable  use  of  their  power.  But  these 
counsels  come  with  an  ill  grace  from  the  gentleman  from  Maryland.  He, 
too,  is  a  member  of  a  majority — a  political  majority.  And  how  has  the 
administration  of  that  majority  exercised  their  power  in  this  country  ?  Be- 
call  to  your  recollection  the  4th  of  March,  1829,  when  the  lank,  lean, 
famished  forms,  from  fen  and  forest,  and  the  four  quarters  of  the  Union, 
gathered  together  in  the  halls  of  patronage  ;  or  stealing  by  evening's  twi- 
light into  the  apartments  of  the  president's  mansion,  cried  out,  with  ghastly 
faces,  and  in  sepulchral  tones,  "  give  us  bread  !  gives  us  treasury  pap ! 


464  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

give  us  our  reward !"  England's  bard  was  mistaken ;  ghosts  will  some- 
times come,  called  or  uncalled.  Go  to  the  families  who  were  driven  from 
the  employments  on  which  they  were  dependent  for  subsistence,  in  con- 
Bequence  of  their  exercise  of  the  dearest  right  of  freemen.  Go  to  mothers, 
while  hugging  to  their  bosoms  their  starving  children.  Go  to  fathers  who, 
after  being  disqualified  by  long  public  service  for  any  other  business,  were 
stripped  of  their  humble  places,  and  then  sought,  by  the  minions  of  au- 
thority, to  be  stripped  of  all  that  was  left  them — their  good  names — and 
ask,  what  mercy  was  shown  to  them !  As  for  myself,  born  in  the  midst  of 
the  Kevoluiion,  the  first  air  that  I  ever  breathed  on  my  native  soil  of  Vir- 
ginia having  been  that  of  liberty  and  independence,  I  never  expected  just- 
ice, nor  desired  mercy  at  their  hands  ;  and  scorn  the  wrath  and  defy  the 
oppression  of  power. 

I  regret,  Mr.  President,  that  one  topic  has,  I  think,  unnecessarily  been 
introduced  into  this  debate.  I  allude  to  the  charge  brought  against  the 
manufacturing  system,  as  favoring  the  growth  of  aristocracy.  If  it  were 
true,  would  gentlemen  prefer  supporting  foreign  accumulations  of  wealth, 
by  that  description  of  industry,  rather  than  in  their  own  country  ?  But  is 
it  correct  ?  The  joint-stock  companies  of  the  North,  as  I  understand  them, 
are  nothing  more  than  associations,  sometimes  of  hundreds,  by  means  of 
which  the  small  earnings  of  many  are  brought  into  a  common  stock,  and 
the  associates,  obtaining  corporate  privileges,  are  enabled  to  prosecute, 
under  one  superintending  head,  their  business  to  better  advantage.  Nothing 
can  be  more  essentially  democratic  or  better  devised  to  counterpoise  the 
influence  of  individual  wealth.  In  Kentucky,  almost  every  manufactory 
known  to  me,  is  in  the  hands  of  enterprising  and  self-made  men,  who  have 
acquired  whatever  wealth  they  possess  by  patient  and  diligent  labor.  Com- 
parisons are  odious,  and  but  in  defense  would  not  be  made  by  me.  But  is 
there  more  tendency  to  aristocracy  in  a  manufactory,  supporting  hundreds 
of  freemen,  or  in  a  cotton  plantation,  with  its  not  less  numerous  slaves, 
sustaining  perhaps  only  two  white  families — that  of  the  master  and  the 
overseer  ? 

I  pass,  with  pleasure,  from  this  disagreeable  topic,  to  two  general  propo- 
sitions which  cover  the  entire  ground  of  debate.  The  first  is,  that  under 
the  operation  of  the  American  system,  the  objects  which  it  protects  and 
fosters  are  brought  to  the  consumer  at  cheaper  prices  than  they  commanded 
prior  to  its  introduction,  or,  than  they  would  command  if  it  did  not  exist. 
If  that  be  true,  ought  not  the  country  to  be  contented  and  satisfied  with 
the  system,  unless  the  second  proposition,  which  I  mean  presently  also  to 
consider,  is  unfounded  ?  And  that  is,  that  the  tendency  of  the  system  is  to 
sustain,  and  that  it  has  upheld,  the  prices  of  all  our  agricultural  and  other 
produce,  including  cotton. 

And  is  the  fact  not  indisputable,  that  all  essential  objects  of  consumption 
affected  by  the  tariff,  arc  cheaper  and  better  since  the  act  of  1824,  than 
they  were  for  several  years  prior  to  that  law  ?     I  appeal  for  its  truth  to 


ON   THE    AMERICAN    SYSTEM.  465 

common  observation,  and  to  all  practical  men.  I  appeal  to  the  farmer  of 
the  country,  whether  he  does  not  purchase  on  better  terms  his  iron,  salt, 
brown  sugar,  cotton  goods,  and  woolens,  for  his  laboring  people  ?  And  I 
ash  the  cotton  planter  if  he  has  not  been  better  and  more  cheaply  supplied 
with  his  cotton-bagging  ?  In  regard  to  this  latter  article,  the  gentleman 
from  South  Carolina  was  mistaken,  in  supposing  that  I  complained  that, 
under  the  existing  duty,  the  Kentucky  manufacturer  could  not  compete 
with  the  Scotch.  The  Kentuckian  furnishes  a  more  substantial  and  a 
cheaper  article,  and  at  a  more  uniform  and  regular  price.  But  it  was  the 
frauds,  the  violations  of  law,  of  which  I  did  complain  ;  not  smuggling,  in 
the  common  sense  of  that  practice,  which  has  something  bold,  daring,  and 
enterprising  in  it,  but  mean,  bare-faced  cheating,  by  fraudulent  invoices  and 
false  denominations. 

I  plant  myself  upon  this  fact,  of  cheapness  and  superiority,  as  upon  im- 
pregnable ground.     Gentlemen  may  tax  their  ingenuity,  and  produce  a 
thousand  speculative  solutions  of  the  fact,  but  the  fact  itself  will  remain 
undisturbed.     Let  us  look  into  some  particulars.     The  total  consumption 
of  bar  iron  in  the  United  States  is  supposed  to  be  about  one  hundred  and 
forty-six  thousand  tons,  of  which  one  hundred  and  twelve  thousand  eight 
hundred  and  sixty-six  tons  are  made  within  the  country,  and  the  residue 
imported.     The  number  of  men  employed  in  the  manufacture  is  estimated 
at  twenty-nine  thousand  two  hundred  and  fifty-four,  and  the  total,  number 
of  persons  subsisted  by  it  at  one  hundred  and  forty-six  thousand  two 
hundred  and  seventy-three.     The  measure  of  protection  extended  to  this 
necessary  article  was  never  fully  adequate  until  the  passage  of  the  act  of 
1828;   and  what  has  been  the  consequence?     The  annual  increase  of 
quantity,  since  that  period,  has  been  in  a  ratio  of  near  twenty-five  per 
centum,  and  the  wholesale  price  of  bar  iron  in  the  northern  cities  was,  in 
1828,  one  hundred  and  five  dollars  per  ton;  in  1829,  one  hundred  dollars; 
in  1830,  ninety  dollars;  and  in  1831,  from  eighty-five  to  seventy-five  dol- 
lars—constantly diminishing.     We  import  very  little  English  irou,  and  that 
which  we  do  is  very  inferior,  and  only  adapted  to  a  few  purposes.     In  in- 
stituting a  comparison  between  that  inferior  article  and  our  superior  iron, 
subjects  entirely  different  are  compared.      They  are  made  by  different 
processes.     The  English  can  not  make  iron  of  equal  quality  to  ours,  at  a 
less  price  than  we  do.     They  have  three  classes,  best-best,  best,  and  ordi- 
nary.   It  is  the  latter  which  is  imported.     Of  the  whole  amount  imported, 
there  is  only  about  four  thousand  tons  of  foreign  iron  that  pays  the  high 
duty,  the  residue  paying  only  a  duty  of  about  thirty  per  centum,  estimated 
on  the  prices  of  the  importation  of  1829.     Our  iron  ore  is  superior  to  that 
of  Great  Britain,  yielding  often  from  sixty  to  eighty  per  centum,  while 
theirs  produces  only  about  twenty-five.     This  fact  is  so  well  known,  that  I 
have  heard  of  recent  exportations  of  iron  ore  to  Endand. 

It  has  been  alleged,  that  bar  iron,  being  a  raw  material,  ought  to  be  ad- 
mitted free,  or  with  low  duties,  for  the  sake  of  the  manufacturers  them- 

30 


/ 


466  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

selves.  But  I  take  this  to  be  the  true  principle,  that  if  our  country  is 
producing  a  raw  material  of  prime  necessity,  and  with  reasonable  protec- 
tion, can  produce  it  in  sufficient  quantity  to  supply  our  wants,  that  raw 
material  ought  to  be  protected,  although  it  may  be  proper  to  protect  the 
article  also  out  of  which  it  is  manufactured.  The  tailor  will  ask  protection 
for  himself,  but  wishes  it  denied  to  the  grower  of  wool  and  the  manufacturer 
of  broadcloth.  The  cotton  planter  enjoys  protection  for  the  raw  material, 
but  does  not  desire  it  to  be  extended  to  the  cotton  manufacurer.  The  ship 
builder  will  ask  protection  for  navigation,  but  does  not  wish  it  extended  to 
the  essential  articles  which  enter  into  the  construction  of  his  ship.  Each 
in  his  proper  vocation  solicits  protection,  but  would  have  it  denied  to  all 
other  interests  which  are  supposed  to  come  into  collision  with  his. 

Now  the  duty  of  the  statesman  is,  to  elevate  himself  above  these  petty 
conflicts ;  calmly  to  survey  all  the  various  interests,  and  deliberately  to 
proportion  the  measures  of  protection  to  each,  according  to  the  nature 
and  to  the  general  wants  of  society.  It  is  quite  possible  that,  in  the  de- 
gree of  protection  which  has  been  afforded  to  the  various  workers  in  iron, 
there  may  be  some  error  committed,  although  I  have  lately  read  an  argu- 
ment of  much  ability,  proving  that  no  injustice  has  really  been  done  to 
them.     If  there  be,  it  ought  to  be  remedied. 

The  next  article  to  which  I  would  call  the  attention  of  the  Senate,  is 
that  of  cotton  fabrics.  The  success  of  our  manufacture  of  coarse  cottons 
is  generally  admitted.  It  is  demonstrated  by  the  fact  that  they  meet  the 
cotton  fabrics  of  other  countries  in  foreign  markets,  and  maintain  a  suc- 
cessful competition  with  them.  There  has  been  a  gradual  increase  of  the 
exports  of  this  article,  which  is  sent  to  Mexico  and  the  South  American 
republics,  to  the  Mediterranean,  and  even  to  Asia.  The  remarkable  fact 
was  lately  communicated  to  me,  that  the  same  individual,  who  twenty-five 
years  ago  was  engaged  in  the  importation  of  cotton-cloth  from  Asia  for 
American  consumption,  is  now  engaged  in  the  exportation  of  coarse  Amer- 
ican cottons  to  Asia,  for  Asiatic  consumption  !  And  my  honorable  friend 
from  Massachusetts,  now  in  my  eye  (Mr.  Silsbee),  informed  me,  that  on  his 
departure  from  home,  among  the  last  orders  which  he  gave,  one  was  for 
the  exportation  of  coarse  cottons  to  Sumatra,  in  the  vicinity  of  Calcutta ! 
I  hold  in  my  hand  a  statement,  derived  from  the  most  authentic  source, 
showing  that  the  identical  description  of  cotton  cloth,  which  sold  in  1817 
at  twenty-nine  cents  per  yard,  was  sold  in  1819  at  twenty-one  cents,  in 
1821  at  nineteen  and  a  half  cents,  in  1823  at  seventeen  cents,  in  1825  at 
fourteen  and  a  half  cents,  in  1827  at  thirteen  cents,  in  1829  at  nine  cents, 
in  1830  at  nine  and  a  half  cents,  and  in  1831  at  from  ten  and  a  half  to 
eleven.  Such  is  the  wonderful  effect  of  protection,  competition,  and  im- 
provement in  skill,  combined  !  The  year  1829  was  one  of  some  suffering 
to  this  branch  of  industry,  probably  owing  to  the  principle  of  competition 
being  pushed  too  far.  Hence  we  observe  a  small  rise  in  the  article  for  the 
next  two  years.      The  introduction   of  calico-printing  into  the  United 


ON  THE   AMERICAN   SYSTEM.  467 

States,  constitutes  an  important  era  in  our  manufacturing  industry.  It 
commenced  about  the  year  1825,  and  has  since  made  such  astonishing  ad- 
vances, that  the  whole  quantity  now  annually  printed  is  but  little  short  of 
forty  millions  of  yards — about  two  thirds  of  our  whole  consumption.  It  is  a 
beautiful  manufacture,  combining  great  mechanical  skill  with  scientific  dis- 
coveries in  chemistry.  The  engraved  cylinders  for  making  the  impression 
require  much  taste,  and  put  in  requisition  the  genius  of  the  fine  arts  of 
design  and  engraving.  Are  the  fine  graceful  forms  of  our  fair  coun- 
trywomen less  lovely  when  enveloped  in  the  chintzes  and  calicoes  pro- 
duced by  native  industry,  than  when  clothed  in  the  tinsel  of  foreign 
drapery  ? 

Gentlemen  are  no  doubt  surprised  at  these  facts.  They  should  not 
underrate  the  energies,  the  enterprise,  and  the  skill  of  our  fellow-citizens. 
I  have  no  doubt  they  are  every  way  competent  to  accomplish  whatever 
can  be  effected  by  any  other  people,  if  encouraged  and  protected  by  the 
fostering  care  of  our  own  government.  Will  gentlemen  believe  the  fact, 
which  I  am  authorized  now  to  state,  that  the  United  States,  at  this  time, 
manufacture  one  half  the  quantity  of  cotton  which  Great  Britain  did  in 
1816!  We  possess  three  great  advantages:  first,  the  raw  material; 
second,  water-power  instead  of  that  of  steam,  generally  used  in  En- 
gland ;  and,  third,  the  cheaper  labor  of  females.  In  England,  males 
spin  with  the  mule  and  weave  ;  in  this  country,  women  and  girls  spin  with 
the  throstle,  and  superintend  the  power-loom.  And  can  there  be  any  em- 
ployment more  appropriate  ?  Who  has  not  been  delighted  with  contem- 
plating the  clock-work  regularity  of  a  large  cotton  manufactory  ?  I  have 
often  visited  them  at  Cincinnati  and  other  places,  and  always  with  increased 
admiration.  The  women,  separated  from  the  other  sex,  work  in  apart- 
ments, large,  airy,  well  w^armed,  and  spacious.  Neatly  dressed,  with  ruddy 
complexions,  and  happy  countenances,  they  watch  the  work  before  them, 
mend  the  broken  threads,  and  replace  the  exhausted  balls  or  broaches. 
At  stated  hours  they  are  called  to  their  meals,  and  go  and  return  with 
light  and  cheerful  step.  At  night  they  separate,  and  repair  to  their  re- 
spective houses,  under  the  care  of  a  mother,  guardian,  or  friend.  "  Six 
days  shalt  thou  labor  and  do  all  that  thou  hast  to  do,  but  the  seventh  day 
is  the  sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God."  Accordingly,  we  behold  them  on  that 
sacred  day,  assembled  together  in  His  temples,  and  in  devotional  attitudes 
and  with  pious  countenances  offering  their  prayers  to  heaven  for  all  its 
blessings ;  of  which  it  is  not  the  least,  that  a  system  of  policy  has  been 
adopted  by  their  country,  which  admits  of  their  obtaining  a  comfortable 
subsistence.  Manufactures  have  brought  into  profitable  employment 
a  vast  amount  of  female  labor,  which,  without  them,  would  be  lost  to  the 
country. 

In  respect  to  woolens,  every  gentleman's  own  observation  and  experience 
will  enable  him  to  judge  of  the  great  reduction  of  price  which  has  taken 
place  in  most  of  these  articles,  since  the  tariff  of  1824.     It  would  have 


468  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

been  still  greater,  but  for  the  high  duty  on  the  raw  material,  imposed  for 
the  particular  benefit  of  the  farming  interest.  But,  without  going  into 
particular  details,  I  shall  limit  myself  to  inviting  the  attention  of  the  Senate 
to  a  single  article  of  general  and  necessary  use.  The  protection  given  to 
flannels  in  1828  was  fully  adequate.  It  has  euabled  the  American  manu- 
facturer to  obtain  complete  possession  of  the  American  market ;  and  now 
let  us  look  at  the  effect.  I  have  before  me  a  statement  from  a  highly  re- 
spectable mercantile  house,  showing  the  price  of  four  descriptions  of  flannel 
during  six  years.  The  average  price  of  them,  in  1826,  was  thirty-eight 
cents  and  three  quarters;  in  1827,  thirty-eight ;  in  1828  (the  year  of 
the  tariff),  forty-six ;  in  1829,  thirty-six ;  in  1830  (notwithstanding  the 
advance  in  the  price  of  wool),  thirty-two ;  and  in  1831,  thirty-two  and 
one  quarter.  These  facts  require  no  comments.  I  have  before  me  another 
statement  of  a  practical  and  respectable  man,  well  versed  in  the  flannel 
manufacture  in  America  and  England,  demonstrating  that  the  cost  of  manu- 
facture is  precisely  the  same  in  both  countries  ;  and  that,  although  a  yard 
of  flannel  which  would  sell  in  England  at  fifteen  cents,  would  commaud  here 
twenty-two,  the  difference  of  seven  cents  is  the  exact  difference  between  the 
cost  in  the  two  countries,  of  the  six  ounces  of  wool  contained  in  a  yard  of 
flannel. 

Brown  sugar,  during  ten  years,  from  1792  to  1802,  with  a  duty  of  one 
and  a  half  cents  per  pound,  averaged  fourteen  cents  per  pound.  The  same 
article,  during  ten  years,  from  1820  to  1830,  with  a  duty  of  three  cents, 
has  averaged  only  eight  cents  per  pound.  Nails,  with  a  duty  of  five  cents 
per  pound,  are  selling  at  six  cents.  Window  glass,  eight  by  ten,  prior  to 
the  tariff  of  1824,  sold  at  twelve  or  thirteen  dollars  per  hundred  feet;  it 
now  sells  for  three  dollars  seventy -five  cents. 

The  gentleman  from  South  Carolina,  sensible  of  the  incontestable  fact 
of  the  very  great  reduction  in  the  price  of  the  necessaries  of  life,  protected 
by  the  American  system,  has  felt  the  full  force  of  it,  and  has  presented 
various  explanations  of  the  causes  to  which  he  ascribes  it.  The  first  is,  the 
diminished  production  of  the  precious  metals,  in  consequence  of  the  dis- 
tressed state  of  the  countries  in  which  they  are  extracted,  and  the  conse- 
quent increase  of  their  value,  relative  to  that  of  the  commodities  for  which 
they  are  exchanged.  But,  if  this  be  the  true  cause  of  the  reduction  of 
price,  its  operation  ought  to  have  been  general,  on  all  objects,  and  of  course 
upon  cotton  among  the  rest.  And,  in  point  of  fact,  the  diminshed  price 
of  that  staple  is  not  greater  than  the  diminution  of  the  value  of  other  staples 
of  our  agriculture.  Flour,  which  commanded  some  years  ago,  ten  or  twelve 
dollars  per  barrel,  is  now  sold  for  five.  The  fall  of  tobacco  has  been  still 
more.  The  kite-foot  of  Maryland,  which  sold  at  from  sixteen  to  twenty 
dollars  per  hundred,  now  produces  only  four  or  five.  That  of  Virginia  has 
sustained  an  equal  decline.  Beef,  pork,  every  article  almost  produced  by 
the  farmer,  has  decreased  in  value.  Ought  not  South  Carolina,  then,  to 
submit  quietly  to  a  state  of  things  which  is  general,  and  proceeds  from  an 


ON   THE   AMERICAN   SYSTEM.  469 

uncontrollable  cause  ?  Ought  she  to  ascribe  to  the  "  accursed"  tariff,  what 
results  from  the  calamities  of  civil  and  foreign  war,  raging  in  many  coun- 
tries? 

But,  sir,  I  do  not  subscribe  to  this  doctrine,  implicitly.  I  do  not  believe 
that  the  diminished  production  of  the  precious  metals,  if  that  be  the  fact, 
satisfactorily  accounts  for  the  fall  in  prices ;  for  I  think  that  the  augmenta- 
tion of  the  currency  of  the  world,  by  means  of  banks,  public  stocks,  and 
other  facilities  arising  out  of  exchange  and  credit,  has  more  than  supplied 
any  deficiency  in  the  amount  of  the  precious  metals. 

It  is  further  urged,  that  the  restoration  of  peace  in  Europe,  after  the 
battle  of  Waterloo,  and  the  consequent  return  to  peaceful  pursuits  of  large 
masses  of  its  population,  by  greatly  increasing  the  aggregate  amount  of 
effective  labor,  had  a  tendency  to  lower  prices  ;  and  undoubtedly  such 
ought  to  have  its  natural  tendency.  The  same  cause,  however,  must  also 
have  operated  to  reduce  the  price  of  our  agricultural  produce,  for  which 
there  was  no  longer  the  same  demand  in  peace  as  in  war;  and  it  did  so 
operate.  But  its  influence  on  the  price  of  manufactured  articles,  between 
the  general  peace  of  Europe  in  1815,  and  the  adoption  of  our  tariff  in  1824, 
was  less  sensibly  felt,  because,  perhaps,  a  much  larger  portion  of  the  labor, 
liberated  by  the  disbandment  of  armies,  was  absorbed  by  manufactures  than 
by  agriculture.  It  is  also  contended,  that  the  invention  and  improvement 
of  labor-saving  machinery,  have  tended  to  lessen  the  prices  of  manufac- 
tured objects  of  consumption  ;  and  undoubtedly  this  cause  has  had  some 
effect.  Ought  not  America  to  contribute  her  quota  of  this  cause,  and  has 
she  not  by  her  skill  and  extraordinary  adaptation  to  the  arts,  in  truth  large- 
ly contributed  to  it? 

This  brings  me  to  consider  what  T  apprehend  to  have  been  the  most  ef- 
ficient of  all  the  causes  in  the  reduction  of  the  prices  of  manufactured 
articles,  and  that  is  competition.  By  competition,  the  total  amount  of  the 
supply  is  increased,  and  by  increase  of  the  supply,  a  competition  in  the 
sale  ensues,  and  this  enables  the  consumer  to  buy  at  lower  rates.  Of  all 
human  powers  operating  on  the  affairs  of  mankind,  none  is  greater  than 
that  of  competition.  It  is  action  and  reaction.  It  operates  between  indi- 
viduals in  the  same  nation,  and  between  different  nations.  It  resembles 
the  meeting  of  the  mountain  torrent,  grooving,  by  its  precipitous  motion, 
its  own  channel,  and  ocean's  tide.  Unopposed,  it  sweeps  every  thing  before 
it;  but,  counterpoised,  the  waters  become  calm,  safe,  and  regular.  It  is 
like  the  segments  of  a  circle  or  an  arch  ;  taken  separately,  each  is  noth- 
ing; but  in  their  combination  they  produce  efficacy,  symmetry,  and  per- 
fection. By  the  American  system  this  vast  power  has  been  excited  in 
America,  and  brought  into  being  to  act  in  co-operation  or  collision  with 
European  industry.  Europe  acts  within  itself,  and  with  America ;  and 
America  acts  within  itself,  and  with  Europe.  The  consequence  is  the  re- 
duction of  prices  in  both  hemispheres.  Nor  is  it  fair  to  argue  from  the 
reduction  of  prices   in  Europe,  to  her  own  presumed  skill  and  labor  ex- 


470  SPEECHES   OP    HENRY    CLAY. 

clusively.  We  affect  her  prices,  and  she  affects  ours.  This  must  always 
be  the  case,  at  least  in  reference  to  any  articles  as  to  which  there  is  not  a 
total  non-intercourse  ;  and  if  our  industry,  by  diminishing  the  demand  for 
her  supplies,  should  produce  a  diminution  in  the  price  of  those  supplies, 
it  would  be  very  unfair  to  ascribe  that  reduction  to  her  ingenuity,  instead 
of  placing  it  to  the  credit  of  our  own  skill  and  excited  industry. 

Practical  men  understand  very  well  this  state  of  the  case,  whether  they 
do  or  do  not  comprehend  the  causes  which  produce  it.  I  have  in  my 
possession  a  letter  from  a  respectable  merchant,  well  known  to  me,  in 
which  he  says,  after  complaining  of  the  operation  of  the  tariff  of  1828,  on 
the  articles  to  which  it  applies,  some  of  which  he  had  imported,  and  that 
his  purchases  having  been  made  in  England,  before  the  passage  of  that 
tariff  was  known,  it  produced  such  an  effect  upon  the  English  market,  that 
the  articles  could  not  be  resold  without  loss,  he  adds  ;  "  for  it  really  ap- 
pears that,  when  additional  duties  are  laid  upon  an  article,  it  then  becomes 
lower  instead  of  higher."  This  would  not  probably  happen,  where  the 
supply  of  the  foreign  article  did  not  exceed  the  home  demand,  unless  upon 
the  supposition  of  the  increased  duty  having  excited  or  stimulated  the 
measure  of  the  home  production. 

The  great  law  of  price  is  determined  by  supply  and  demand.  What- 
ever affects  either,  affects  the  price.  If  the  supply  is  increased,  the  demand 
remaining  the  same,  the  price  declines;  if  the  demand  is  increased,  the 
supply  remaining  the  same,  the  price  advances ;  if  both  supply  and  de- 
mand are  undiminished,  the  price  is  stationary,  and  the  price  is  influenced  i 
exactly  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  disturbance  to  the  demand  or  supply.  / 
It  is,  therefore,  a  great  error  to  suppose  that  an  existing  or  new  duty 
necessarily  becomes  a  componeut  element  to  its  exact  amount  of  price.  If 
the  proportion  of  demand  and  supply  are  varied  by  the  duty,  either  in 
augmenting  the  supply  or  diminishing  the  demand,  or  vice  versa,  price 
is  affected  to  the  extent  of  that  variation.  But  the  duty  never  becomes 
an  integral  part  of  the  price,  except  in  the  instances  where  the  de- 
mand and  the  supply  remain  after  the  duty  is  imposed,  precisely  what 
they  were  before,  or  the  demand  is  increased,  and  the  supply  remains 
stationary. 

Competition,  therefore,  wherever  existing,  whether  at  home  or  abroad,  is 
the  present  cause  of  cheapness.  If  a  high  duty  excites  production  at  home, 
and  the  quantity  of  the  domestic  article  exceeds  the  amount  which  had  been 
previously  imported,  the  price  will  fall.  This  accounts  for  an  extraordinary 
fact  stated  by  a  senator  from  Missouri.  Three  cents  were  laid  as  a  duty 
upon  a  pound  of  lead,  by  the  act  of  1828.  The  price  at  Galena,  and  the 
other  lead  mines,  afterward  fell  to  one  and  a  half  cents  per  pound.  Now 
it  is  obvious  that  the  duty  did  not,  in  this  case,  enter  into  the  price  ;  for  it 
was  twice  the  amount  of  the  price.  What  produced  the  fall  ?  It  was 
stimulated  production  at  home,  excited  by  the  temptation  of  the  exclusive 
possession  of  the  home  market.     This  state  of  things  could  not  last.     Men 


ON    THE   AMERICAN    SYSTEM.  471 

would  not  continue  an  unprofitable  pursuit ;  some  abandoned  tbe  business, 
or  tbe  total  quantity  produced  was  diminished,  and  living  prices  bave  been 
tbe  consequence.  But  break  down  the  domestic  supply,  place  us  again  in 
a  state  of  dependence  on  the  foreign  source,  and  can  it  be  doubted  that  we 
should  ultimately  have  to  supply  ourselves  at  dearer  rates  ?  It  is  not  fair 
to  credit  the  foreign  market  with  tbe  depression  of  prices  produced  there 
by  the  influence  of  our  competition.  Let  the  competition  be  withdrawn, 
and  their  prices  would  instantly  rise.  On  this  subject,  great  mistakes  are 
committed.  I  have  seen  most  erroneous  reasoning  in  a  late  report  of  Mr. 
Lee,  of  the  free-trade  convention  in  regard  to  the  article  of  sugar.  He  cal- 
culates the  total  amount  of  brown  sugar  produced  in  the  world,  and  then 
states,  that  what  is  made  in  Louisiana  is  not  more  than  two  and  a  half 
per  centum  of  that  total.  Although  this  data  may  be  questioned,  let  us 
assume  their  truth,  and  what  might  be  the  result  ?  Price  being  deter- 
mined by  the  proportions  of  supply  and  demand,  it  is  evident  that  when 
the  supply  exceeds  the  demand,  the  price  will  fall.  And  the  fall  is  not  al- 
ways regulated  by  the  amount  of  that  excess.  If  the  market  at  a  given 
price,  required  five  or  fifty  millions  of  hogsheads  of  sugar,  a  surplus  of  only 
a  few  hundred  might  materially  influence  the  price,  and  diffuse  itself 
throughout  the  whole  mass.  Add,  therefore,  the  eighty  or  one  hundred 
thousand  hogsheads  of  Louisiana  sugar  to  the  entire  mass  produced  in 
other  parts  of  the  world,  and  it  can  not  be  doubted  that  a  material  reduc- 
tion of  the  price  of  the  article,  throughout  Europe  and  America,  would 
take  place.  The  Louisiana  sugar  substituting  foreign  sugar  in  the  home 
market,  to  the  amount  of  its  annual  produce,  would  force  an  equal  amount 
of  foreign  sugar  into  other  markets,  which  being  glutted,  the  price  would 
necessarily  decline,  and  this  decline  of  price  would  press  portions  of  the 
foreign  sugar  into  competition  in  the  United  States  with  Louisiana  sugar 
the  price  of  which  would  also  be  brought  down.  The  fact  has  been  in  ex- 
act conformity  with  this  theory.  But  now  let  us  suppose  the  Louisiana 
sugar  to  be  entirely  withdrawn  from  the  general  consumption,  what  then 
would  happen  ?  A  new  demand  would  be  created  in  America  for  foreign 
sugar,  to  the  extent  of  the  eighty  or  one  hundred  thousand  hogsheads 
made  in  Louisiana ;  a  less  amount  by  that  quantity  would  be  sent  to  the 
European  markets,  and  the  price  would  consequently  everywhere  rise.  It 
is  not,  therefore,  those  who,  by  keeping  on  duties,  keep  down  prices,  that 
tax  the  people,  but  those  who,  by  repealing  duties,  would  raise  prices,  that 
really  impose  burdens  upon  the  people. 

But  it  is  argued,  that  if,  by  the  skill,  experience,  and  perfection,  which 
we  have  acquired  in  certain  branches  of  manufacture,  they  can  be  made 
as  cheap  as  similar  articles  abroad,  and  enter  fairly  into  competition  with 
them,  why  not  repeal  the  duties  as  to  those  articles  ?  And  why  should  we  ? 
Assuming  the  truth  of  the  supposition,  the  foreign  article  would  not  be 
introduced  in  the  regular  course  of  trade,  but  would  remain  excluded  by 
the  possession  of  the  home  market,  which  the  domestic  article  had  obtain- 


472  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

ed.  The  repeal,  therefore,  would  have  no  legitimate  effect.  But  might 
not  the  foreign  article  be  imported  in  vast  quantities,  to  glut  our  markets, 
break  down  our  establishments,  and  ultimately  to  enable  the  foreigner  to 
monopolize  the  supply  of  our  consumption  1  America  is  the  greatest  for- 
eicn  market  for  European  manufactures.  It  is  that  to  which  European  at- 
tention is  constantly  directed.  If  a  great  house  becomes  bankrupt  there, 
its  store-houses  are  emptied,  and  the  goods  are  shipped  to  America,  where, 
in  consequence  of  our  auctions,  and  our  custom-house  credits,  the  greatest 
facilities  are  afforded  in  the  sale  of  them.  Combinations  among  manufac- 
turers might  take  place,  or  even  the  operations  of  foreign  governments 
might  be  directed  to  the  destruction  of  our  establishments.  A  repeal, 
therefore,  of  one  protecting  duty,  from  some  one  or  all  of  these  causes,  would 
be  followed  by  flooding  the  country  with  the  foreign  fabric,  surcharging 
the  market,  reducing  the  price,  and  a  complete  prostration  of  our  manu- 
factories ;  after  which  the  foreigner  would  leisurely  look  about  to  indemnify 
himself  in  the  increased  prices  which  he  would  be  enabled  to  command 
by  his  monopoly  of  the  supply  of  our  consumption.  What  American 
citizen,  after  the  government  had  displayed  this  vacillating  policy,  would 
be  again  tempted  to  place  the  smallest  confidence  in  the  public  faith,  and 
adventure  once  more  in  this  branch  of  industry  ? 

Gentlemen  have  allowed  to  the  manufacturing  portions  of  the  commu- 
nity no  peace ;  they  have  been  constantly  threatened  with  the  overthrow 
of  the  American  system.  From  the  year  1820,  if  not  from  1816,  down 
to  this  time,  they  have  been  held  in  a  condition  of  constant  alarm  and  in- 
security. Nothing  is  more  prejudicial  to  the  great  interests  of  a  nation 
than  unsettled  and  varying  policy.  Although  every  appeal  to  the  national 
legislature  has  been  responded  to  in  conformity  with  the  wishes  and  senti- 
ments of  the  great  majority  of  the  people,  measures  of  protection  have 
only  been  carried  by  such  small  majorities  as  to  excite  hopes  on  the  one 
hand,  and  fears  on  the  other.  Let  the  country  breathe,  let  its  vast  re- 
sources be  developed,  let  its  energies  be  fully  put  forth,  let  it  have  tran- 
quillity, and  my  word  for  it,  the  degree  of  perfection  in  the  arts  which  it 
will  exhibit,  will  be  greater  than  that  which  has  been  presented,  astonish- 
ing as  our  progress  has  been.  Although  some  branches  of  our  manufact- 
ures might,  and  in  foreign  markets  now  do,  fearlessly  contend  with  similar 
foreign  fabrics,  there  are  many  others  yet  in  their  infancy,  struggling  with 
the  difficulties  which  encompass  them.  We  should  look  at  the  whole  sys- 
tem, and  recollect  that  time,  when  we  contemplate  the  great  movements  of 
a  nation,  is  very  different  from  the  short  period  which  is  allotted  for  the 
duration  of  individual  life.  The  honorable  gentleman  from  South  Caro- 
lina well  and  eloquently  said,  in  1824,  "no  great  interest  of  any  couutry 
ever  yet  grew  up  in  a  day  ;  no  new  branch  of  industry  can  become  firmly 
and  profitably  established  but  in  a  long  course  of  years ;  every  thing,  in- 
deed, great  or  good,  is  matured  by  slow  degrees :  that  which  attains  a 
speedy  maturity  is  of  small  value,  and  is  destined  to  a  brief  existence.     It 


ON    THE    AMERICAN    SYSTEM.  473 

is  the  order  of  Providence,  that  powers  gradually  developed,  shall  alone 
attain  permanency  and  perfection.  Thus  must  it  be  with  our  national  in- 
stitutions, and  national  character  itself." 

I  feel  most  sensibly,  Mr.  President,  how  much  I  have  trespassed  upon 
the  Senate.  My  apology  is  a  deep  and  deliberate  conviction,  that  the 
great  cause  under  debate  involves  the  prosperity  and  the  destiny  of  the 
Union.  But  the  best  requital  I  can  make,  for  the  friendly  indulgence 
which  has  been  extended  to  me  by  the  Senate,  and  for  which  I  shall  evei 
retain  sentiments  of  lasting  gratitude,  is  to  proceed  with  as  little  delay  as 
practicable,  to  the  conclusion  of  a  discourse  which  has  not  been  more 
tedious  to  the  Senate  than  exhausting  to  me.  I  have  now  to  consider  the 
remaining  of  the  two  propositions  which  I  have  already  announced.   That  is, 

Second,  that  under  the  operation  of  the  American  system,  the  products 
of  our  agriculture  command  a  higher  price  than  they  would  do  without  it, 
by  the  creation  of  a  home  market ;  and  by  the  augmentation  of  wealth 
produced  by  manufacturing  industry,  which  enlarges  our  powers  of  con- 
sumption both  of  domestic  and  foreign  articles.  The  importance  of  the 
home  market  is  among  the  established  maxims  which  are  universally  rec- 
ognized by  all  writers  and  all  men.  However  some  may  differ  as  to  the 
relative  advantages  of  the  foreign  and  the  home  market,  none  deny  to  the 
latter  great  value  and  high  consideration.  It  is  nearer  to  us ;  beyond  the 
control  of  foreign  legislation ;  and  undisturbed  by  those  vicissitudes  to 
which  all  international  intercourse  is  more  or  less  exposed.  The  most  stu- 
pid are  sensible  of  the  benefit  of  a  residence  in  the  vicinity  of  a  large  man- 
ufactorv,  or  of  a  market  town,  of  a  good  road,  or  of  a  navigable  stream, 
which  connects  their  farms  with  some  great  capital.  If  the  pursuits  of  all 
men  were  perfectly  the  same,  although  they  would  be  in  possession  of  the 
greatest  abundance  of  the  particular  produce  of  their  industry,  they  might, 
at  the  same  time,  be  in  extreme  want  of  other  necessary  articles  of  human 
subsistence.  The  uniformity  of  the  general  occupation  would  preclude  all 
exchanges,  all  commerce.  It  is  only  in  the  diversity  of  the  vocations  of 
the  members  of  a  community  that  the  means  can  be  found  for  those  salu- 
tary exchanges  which  conduce  to  the  general  prosperity.  And  the  greater 
that  diversity,  the  more  extensive  and  the  more  animating  is  the  circle  of 
exchange.  Even  if  foreign  markets  were  freely  and  widely  open  to  the 
reception  of  our  agricultural  produce,  from  its  bulky  nature,  and  the  dis- 
tance of  the  interior,  and  the  dangers  of  the  ocean,  large  portions  of  it 
could  never  profitably  reach  the  foreign  market.  But  let  us  quit  this  field 
of  theory,  clear  as  it  is,  and  look  at  the  practical  operation  of  the  system 
of  protection,  beginning  with  the  most  valuable  staple  of  our  agriculture. 

In  considering  this  staple,  the  first  circumstance  that  excites  our  surprise 
is  the  rapidity  with  which  the  amount  of  it  has  annually  increased.  Does 
not  this  fact,  however,  demonstrate  that  the  cultivation  of  it  could  not  have 
been  so  very  unprofitable  ?  If  the  business  were  ruinous,  would  more  and 
more  have  annually  engaged  in  it  2     The  quantity  in  1816,  was  eighty- 


474  SPEECHES    OF    HENKY    CLAY. 

one  millions  of  pounds;  in  1826,  two  hundred  and  four  millions;  and  in 
1830,  nearly  three  hundred  millions!  The  ground  of  greatest  surprise  is, 
that  it  has  been  able  to  sustain  even  its  present  price  with  such  an  enor- 
mous augmentation  of  quantity.  It  could  not  have  been  done  but  for  tfee 
combined  operation  of  three  causes,  by  which  the  consumption  of  cotton 
fabrics  Las  been  greatly  extended,  in  consequence  of  their  reduced  prices : 
first,  competition ;  second,  the  improvement  of  labor-saving  machinery  ;  v 
and  thirdly,  the  low  price  of  the  raw  material.  The  crop  of  1819,  amount- 
ing to  eighty-eight  millions  of  pounds,  produced  twenty-one  millions  of 
dollars;  the  crop  of  1823,  when  the  amount  was  swelled  to  one  hundred 
and  seventy-four  millions  (almost  double  that  of  1819),  produced  a  less 
sum  by  more  than  half  a  million  of  dollars;  and  the  crop  of  1824,  amount- 
ing to  thirty  millions  of  pounds  less  than  that  of  the  preceding  year,  pro- 
duced a  million  and  a  half  of  dollars  more. 

If  there  be  any  foundation  for  the  established  law  of  price,  supply,  and 
demand,  ought  not  the  fact  of  this  great  increase  of  the  supply  to  account 
satisfactorily  for  the  alleged  low  price  of  cotton  ?  Is  it  necessary  to  look 
beyond  that  single  fact  to  the  tariff,  to  the  diminished  price  of  the  mines 
furnishing  the  precious  metals,  or  to  any  other  cause  for  the  solution  ? 
This  subject  is  well  understood  in  the  South,  and  although  I  can  not  ap- 
prove the  practice  which  has  been  introduced  of  quoting  authority,  and 
still  less  the  authority  of  newspapers,  for  favorite  theories,  I  must  ask  per- 
mission of  the  Senate  to  read  an  article  from  a  southern  newspaper. 

[Here  Mr.  Clay  read  an  article  from  the  Charleston  Gazette.] 

Let  us  suppose  that  the  home  demand  for  cotton,  which  has  been 
created  by  the  American  system,  were  to  cease,  and  that  the  two  hundred 
thousand  bales,  which  the  home  market  now  absorbs,  were  thrown  into 
the  glutted  markets  of  foreign  countries  ;  would  not  the  effect  inevitably  be 
to  produce  a  further  and  great  reduction  in  the  price  of  the  article  ?  If 
there  be  any  truth  iu  the  facts  and  principles  which  I  have  before  stated 
and  endeavored  to  illustrate,  it  can  not  be  doubted  that  the  existence  of 
American  manufactures  has  tended  to  increase  the  demand,  and  extend  the 
consumption  of  raw  material ;  and  that,  but  for  this  increased  demand,  the 
price  of  the  article  would  have  fallen,  possibly  one  half  lower  than  it  now 
is.  The  error  of  the  opposite  argument  is,  in  assuming  one  thing,  which 
being  denied,  the  whole  fails ;  that  is,  it  assumes  that  the  whole  labor  of 
the  United  States  would  be  profitably  employed  without  manufactures. 
Now  the  truth  is,  that  the  system  excites  and  creates  labor,  and  this  labor 
creates  wealth,  and  this  new  wealth  communicates  additional  ability  to 
consume,  which  acts  on  all  the  objects  contributing  to  human  comfort  and 
enjoyment.  The  amount  of  cotton  imported  into  the  two  ports  of  Boston 
and  Providence  alone  during  the  last  year  (and  it  was  imported  exclusively 
for  the  home  manufacture),  was  one  hundred  and  nine  thousand  five  hun- 
dred and  seventeen  bales. 


ON    THE    AMERICAN    SYSTEM.  475 

On  passing  from  that  article  to  others  of  our  agricultural  productions,  we 
Bhall  find  not  less  gratifying  facts.  The  total  quantity  of  flour  imported 
into  Boston,  during  the  same  year,  was  two  hundred  and  eighty-four  thou- 
sand five  hundred  and  four  barrels,  and  three  thousand  nine  hundred  and 
fifty-five  half  barrels ;  of  which,  there  were  from  Virginia,  Georgetown, 
and  Alexandria,  one  hundred  and  fourteen  thousand  two  hundred  and 
twenty-two  barrels ;  of  Indian  corn,  six  hundred  and  eighty-one  thousand 
one  hundred  and  thirty-one  bushels  ;  of  oats,  two  hundred  and  thirty-nine 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  nine  bushels ;  of  rye,  about  fifty  thousand 
bushels  ;  and  of  shorts,  thirty-three  thousand  four  hundred  and  eighty-nine 
bushels  ;  into  the  port  of  Providence,  seventy-one  thousand  three  hundred 
and  sixty-nine  barrels  of  flour ;  two  hundred  and  sixteen  thousand  six 
hundred  and  sixty-two  bushels  of  Indian  corn,  and  seven  thousand  seven 
hundred  and  seventy-two  bushels  of  rye.  And  there  were  discharged  at 
the  port  of  Philadelphia,  four  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  three  hundred 
and  fifty-three  bushels  of  Indian  corn ;  two  hundred  and  one  thousand 
eight  hundred  and  seventy-eight  bushels  of  wheat,  and  one  hundred  and 
ten  thousand  five  hundred  and  fifty -seven  bushels  of  rye  and  barley.  There 
were  slaughtered  in  Boston  during  the  same  year,  1831  (the  only  northern 
city  from  which  I  have  obtained  returns),  thirty-three  thousand  nine  hun- 
dred and  twenty-two  beef  cattle ;  fifteen  thousand  and  four  hundred 
calves  ;  eighty-four  thousand  four  hundred  and  fifty-three  sheep,  and  twen- 
ty-six thousand  eight  hundred  and  seventy-one  swine.  It  is  confidently 
believed,  that  there  is  not  a  less  quantity  of  southern  flour  consumed  at  the 
North  than  eight  huudred  thousand  barrels,  a  greater  amount,  probably, 
than  is  shipped  to  all  the  foreign  markets  of  the  world  together. 

What  would  be  the  condition  of  the  farming  country  of  the  United 
States — of  all  that  portion  which  lies  north,  east,  and  west  of  James 
river,  including  a  large  part  of  North  Carolina — if  a  home  market  did  not 
exist  for  this  immense  amount  of  agricultural  produce  ?  Without  the 
market,  where  coidd  it  be  sold  ?  Iu  foreign  markets  ?  If  their  restrictive 
laws  did  not  exist,  their  capacity  would  not  enable  them  to  purchase  and 
consume  this  vast  addition  to  their  present  supplies,  which  must  be  thrown 
in,  or  thrown  away,  but  for  the  home  market.  But  their  laws  exclude  us 
from  their  markets.  I  shall  content  myself  by  calling  the  attention  of  the 
Senate  to  Great  Britain  only.  The  duties  in  the  ports  of  the  United  King- 
dom on  breadstuffs  are  prohibitory,  except  in  times  of  dearth.  On  rice, 
the  duty  is  fifteen  shillings  sterling  per  hundred  weight,  being  more  than 
one  hundred  per  centum.  On  manufactured  tobacco  it  is  nine  shillings 
sterling  per  pound,  or  about  two  thousand  per  centum.  On  leaf  tobacco 
three  shillings  per  pound,  or  one  thousand  two  hundred  per  centum.  On 
lumber,  and  some  other  articles,  they  are  from  four  hundred  to  fifteen 
hundred  per  centum  more  than  on  similar  articles  imported  from  British 
colonies.  In  the  British  West  Indies  the  duty  on  beef,  pork,  hams,  and 
bacon,  is  twelve  shillings  sterling  per  hundred,  more  than  one  hundred  per 


476  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

centum  on  the  first  cost  of  beef  and  pork  in  the  western  States.  And  yet 
Great  Britain  is  the  power  in  whose  behalf  we  are  called  upon  to  legislate, 
so  that  we  may  enable  her  to  purchase  our  cotton  ! — Great  Britain,  that 
thinks  only  of  herself  in  her  own  legislation  !  When  have  we  experienced 
justice,  much  less  favor,  at  her  hands?  When  did  she  shape  her  legisla- 
tion in  reference  to  the  interests  of  any  foreign  power  ?  She  is  a  great, 
opulent,  and  powerful  nation  ;  but  haughty,  arrogant,  and  supercilious  ; 
not  more  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  world  by  the  sea  that  girts  her 
island,  than  she  is  separated  in  feeling,  sympathy,  or  friendly  consideration 
of  their  welfare.  Gentlemen,  in  supposing  it  impracticable  that  we  should 
successfully  compete  with  her  in  manufactures,  do  injustice  to  the  skill  and 
enterprise  of  their  own  country.  Gallant  as  Great  Britain  undoubtedly 
is,  we  have  gloriously  contended  with  her,  man  to  man,  gun  to  gun,  ship 
to  ship,  fleet  to  fleet,  and  army  to  army.  And  I  have  no  doubt  we  are  des- 
tined to  achieve  equal  success  in  the  more  useful,  if  not  nobler  contest  for 
superiority  in  the  arts  of  civil  life. 

I  could  extend  and  dwell  on  the  long  list  of  articles — the  hemp,  iron, 
lead,  coal,  and  other  items — for  which  a  demand  is  created  in  the  home 
market  by  the  operation  of  the  American  system ;  but  I  should  exhaust 
the  patience  of  the  Senate.  Where,  where  should  we  find  a  market  for 
all  these  articles,  if  it  did  not  exist  at  home  ?  What  would  be  the  condi- 
tion of  the  largest  portion  of  our  people,  and  of  the  territory,  if  this  home 
market  were  annihilated  ?  How  could  they  be  supplied  with  objects  of 
prime  necessity  ?  What  would  not  be  the  certain  and  inevitable  decline 
in  the  price  of  all  these  articles,  but  for  the  home  market  ?  And  allow 
me,  Mr.  President,  to  say,  that  of  all  the  agricultural  parts  of  the  United 
States  which  are  benefited  by  the  operation  of  this  system,  none  are  equally 
so  with  those  which  border  the  Chesapeake  bay,  the  lower  parts  of  North 
Carolina,  Virginia,  and  the  two  shores  of  Maryland.  Their  facilities  of 
transportation,  and  proximity  to  the  North,  give  them  decided  advantages. 

But  if  all  this  reasoning  were  totally  fallacious ;  if  the  price  of  manu- 
factured articles  were  really  higher,  under  the  American  system,  than 
without  it,  I  should  still  argue  that  high  or  low  prices  were  themselves  rel- 
ative— relative  to  the  ability  to  pay  them.  It  is  in  vain  to  tempt,  to  tan- 
talize us  with  the  lower  prices  of  European  fabrics  than  our  own,  if  we 
have  nothing  wherewith  to  purchase  them.  If,  by  the  home  exchanges, 
we  can  be  supplied  with  necessary,  even  if  they  are  dearer  and  worse,  arti- 
cles of  American  production  than  the  foreign,  it  is  better  than  not  to  be 
supplied  at  all.  And  how  would  the  large  portion  of  our  country,  which 
I  have  described,  be  supplied,  but  for  the  home  exchanges  ?  A  poor  peo- 
ple, destitute  of  wealth  or  of  exchangeable  commodities,  has  nothing  to 
purchase  foreign  fabrics  with.  To  them  they  are  equally  beyond  their 
reach,  whether  their  cost  be  a  dollar  or  a  guinea.  It  is  in  this  view  of  the 
matter  that  Great  Britain,  by  her  vast  wealth,  her  excited  and  protected  in- 
dustry, is  enabled  to  bear  a  burden  of  taxation,  which,  when  compared  to 


ON   THE    AMERICAN    SYSTEM.  477 

that  of  other  nations,  appears  enormous,  but  which,  when  her  immense 
riches  are  compared  to  theirs,  is  light  and  trival.  The  gentleman  from 
South  Carolina  has  drawn  a  lively  and  flattering  picture  of  our  coasts, 
bays,  rivers,  and  harbors ;  and  he  argues  that  these  proclaimed  the  design 
of  Providence,  that  we  should  be  a  commercial  people.  I  agree  with  him. 
We  differ  only  as  to  the  means.  He  would  cherish  the  foreign,  and 
neglect  the  internal  trade.  I  would  foster  both.  What  is  navigation  with- 
out ships,  or  ships  without  cargoes  ?  By  penetrating  the  bosoms  of  our 
mountains,  and  extracting  from  them  their  precious  treasures;  by  cultivat- 
ing the  earth,  and  securing  a  home  market  for  its  rich  and  abundant  pro- 
ducts ;  by  employing  the  water  with  which  we  are  blessed ;  by  stimulating 
and  protecting  our  native  industry,  in  all  its  forms ;  we  shall  but  nourish 
and  promote  the  prosperity  of  commerce,  foreign  and  domestic. 

I  have  hitherto  considered  the  question  in  reference  only  to  a  state  of 
peace ;  but  a  season  of  war  ought  not  to  be  entirely  overlooked.  We  have 
enjoyed  nearly  twenty  years  of  peace ;  but  who  can  tell  when  the  storm  of 
war  shall  again  break  forth  ?  Have  we  forgotton,  so  soon,  the  privations 
to  which  not  merely  our  brave  soldiers  and  our  gallant  tars  were  subjected, 
but  the  whole  community,  during  the  last  war,  for  the  want  of  absolute 
necessaries  ?  To  what  an  enormous  price  they  rose  !  And  how  inadequate 
the  supply  was  at  any  price !  The  statesman  who  justly  elevates  his  views 
will  look  behind  as  well  as  forward,  and  at  the  existing  state  of  things ; 
and  he  will  graduate  the  policy,  which  he  recommends,  to  the  probable 
exigences  wrhich  may  arise  in  the  Republic.  Taking  this  comprehensive 
range,  it  would  be  easy  to  show  that  the  higher  prices  of  peace,  if  prices 
were  higher  in  peace,  were  more  than  compensated  by  the  lower  prices  of 
war,  during  which,  supplies  of  all  essential  articles  are  indispensable  to  its 
vigorous,  effectual,  and  glorious  prosecution.  I  conclude  this  part  of  the 
argument  with  the  hope  that  my  humble  exertions  have  not  been  altogether 
unsuccessful  in  showing, 

First,  that  the  policy  which  we  have  been  considering  ought  to  continue 
to  be  regarded  as  the  genuine  American  system. 

Secondly,  that  the  free  trade  system,  which  is  proposed  as  its  substitute, 
ought  really  to  be  considered  as  the  British  colonial  system. 

Thirdly,  that  the  American  system  is  beueficial  to  all  parts  of  the  Union, 
and  absolutely  necessary  to  much  the  larger  portion. 

Fourthly,  that  the  price  of  the  great  staple  of  cotton,  and  of  all  our 
chief  productions  of  agriculture,  has  been  sustained  and  upheld,  and  a  de- 
cline averted,  by  the  protective  system. 

Fifthly,  that  if  the  foreign  demand  for  cotton  has  been  at  all  diminished 
by  the  operation  of  that  system,  the  diminution  has  been  more  than  com- 
pensated in  the  additional  demand  created  at  home. 

Sixthly,  that  the  constant  tendency  of  the  system,  by  creating  competition 
among  ourselves,  and  between  American  and  European  industry,  recipro- 
cally acting  upon  each  other,  is  to  reduce  prices  of  manufactured  objects. 


478  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

Seventhly,  that  in  point  of  fact,  objects  within  the  scope  of  the  policy 
of  protection  have  greatly  fallen  in  price. 

Eighthly,  that  if,  in  a  season  of  peace,  these  benefits  are  experienced,  in 
a  seasorj  of  war,  when  the  foreign  supply  might  be  cut  off,  they  would  be 
much  more  extensively  felt. 

Ninthly,  and  finally,  that  the  substitution  of  the  British  colonial  system 
for  the  American  system,  without  benefiting  any  section  of  the  Union,  by 
subjecting  us  to  a  foreign  legislation,  regulated  by  foreign  interests,  would 
lead  to  the  prostration  of  our  manufactories,  general  impoverishment,  and 
ultimate  ruin. 

And  now,  Mr.  President,  I  have  to  make  a  few  observations  on  a  delicate 
subject,  which  I  approach  with  all  the  respect  that  is  due  to  its  serious  and 
grave  nature.  They  have  not,  indeed,  been  rendered  necessary  by  the 
speech  from  the  gentleman  from  South  Carolina,  whose  forbearance  to  notice 
the  topic  was  commendable,  as  his  argument  throughout  was  characterized 
by  an  ability  and  dignity  worthy  of  him,  and  of  the  Senate.  The  gentle- 
man made  one  declaration,  which  might  possibly  be  misinterpreted,  and  I 
submit  to  him  whether  an  explanation  of  it  be  not  proper.  The  declaration, 
as  reported  in  his  printed  speech,  is,  "  The  instinct  of  self-interest  might  have 
taught  us  an  easier  way  of  relieving  ourselves  from  this  oppression.  It 
wanted  but  the  will  to  have  supplied  ourselves  with  every  article  embraced 
in  the  protective  system,  free  of  duty,  without  any  other  participation  on 
our  part  than  a  simple  consent  to  receive  them." 

[Here  General  Hayne  rose  and  remarked  that  the  passages  which  immediately 
preceded  and  followed  the  paragraph  cited  he  thought  plainly  indicated  his 
meaning,  which  related  to  evasion  of  the  system,  by  illicit  introduction  of  goods, 
which  they  were  not  disposed  to  countenance  in  South  Carolina.] 

I  am  happy  to  hear  this  explanation.  But,  sir,  it  is  impossible  to  con- 
ceal from  our  view  the  facts,  that  there  is  a  great  excitement  in  South 
Carolina ;  that  the  protective  system  is  openly  and  violently  denounced  in 
popular  meetings ;  and  that  the  Legislature  itself  has  declared  its  purpose 
of  resorting  to  counteracting  measures,  a  suspension  of  which  has  only 
been  submitted  to,  for  the  purpose  of  allowing  Congress  time  to  retrace 
its  steps.  With  respect  to  this  Union,  Mr.  President,  the  truth  can  not 
be  too  generally  proclaimed,  nor  too  strongly  inculcated,  that  it  is  neces- 
sary to  the  whole  and  to  all  the  parts — necessary  to  those  parts,  indeed, 
in  different  degrees,  but  vitally  necessary  to  each — and  that  threats  to  dis- 
turb or  dissolve  it,  coming  from  any  of  the  parts,  would  be  quite  as  in- 
discreet and  improper  as  would  be  threats  from  the  residue  to  exclude 
those  parts  from  the  pale  of  its  benefits.  The  great  principle  which  lies 
at  the  foundation  of  all  free  governments,  is,  that  the  majority  must 
govern  ;  from  which  there  is  or  can  be  no  appeal  but  to  the  sword. 
That  majority  ought  to  govern  wisely,  equitably,  moderately,  and  consti- 
tutionally, but  govern  it  must,  subject  only  to  that  terrible  appeal.     If 


ON    THE   AMERICAN    SYSTEM.  479 

ever  one  or  several  States,  being  a  minority,  can,  by  menacing  a  dissolu- 
tion of  the  Union,  succeed  in  forcing  an  abandonment  of  great  measures, 
deemed  essential  to  the  interests  and  prosperity  of  the  whole,  the  Union 
from  that  moment  is  practically  gone.  It  may  linger  on,  in  form  and 
name,  but  its  vital  spirit  has  fled  forever !  Entertaining  these  deliberate 
opinions,  I  would  in  treat  the  patriotic  people  of  South  Carolina — the  land 
of  Marion,  Sumpter,  and  Pickens ;  of  Rutledge,  Laurens,  the  Pinckneys  and 
Lowndeses  ;  of  living  and  present  names,  which  I  would  mention  if  they 
were  not  living  or  present — to  pause,  solemnly  pause  !  aud  contemplate 
the  frightful  precipice  which  lies  directly  before  them.  To  retreat  may  be 
painful  and  mortifying  to  their  gallantry  and  pride,  but  it  is  to  retreat  to 
the  Union,  to  safety,  and  to  those  brethren  with  whom,  or  with  whose  an- 
cestors, they,  or  their  ancestors,  have  won,  on  fields  of  glory,  imperishable 
renown.  To  advance,  is  to  rush  on  certain  and  inevitable  disgrace  and 
destruction. 

We  have  been  told  of  deserted  castles,  of  uninhabited  halls,  and  of  man- 
sions, once  the  seats  of  opulence  and  hospitality,  now  abandoned  and  molder- 
ing  in  ruins.  I  never  had  the  honor  of  being  in  South  Carolina,  but  I  have 
heard  and  read  of  the  stories  of  its  chivalry,  and  of  its  generous  and  open- 
hearted  liberality.  I  have  heard,  too,  of  the  struggles  for  power,  between 
the  lower  and  upper  country.  The  same  causes  which  existed  in  Vir- 
ginia, with  which  I  have  been  acquainted,  I  presume,  have  had  their  in- 
fluence in  Carolina.  In  whose  hands  now  are  the  once  proud  seats  of 
Westover  Curl,  Maycox,  Shirley,  and  others,  on  James  river,  and  in  lower 
Virginia  ?  Under  the  operation  of  laws,  abolishing  the  principle  of  primo- 
geniture, and  providing  the  equitable  rule  of  au  equal  distribution  of 
estates,  among  those  in  equal  degree  of  consanguinity,  they  have  passed 
into  other  and  stranger  hands.  Some  of  the  descendants  of  illustrious 
families  have  gone  to  the  far  West,  while  others,  lingering  behind,  have 
contrasted  their  present  condition  with  that  of  their  venerated  ancestors* 
They  behold  themselves  excluded  from  their  fathers'  houses,  now  in  the 
hands  of  those  who  were  once  their  fathers'  overseers,  or  sinking  into 
decay  ;  their  imaginations  paint  ancient  renown,  the  fading  honors  of  their 
name — glories  gone  by  ;  too  poor  to  live,  too  proud  to  work,  too  high- 
minded  and  honorable  to  resort  to  ignoble  means  of  acquisition ;  brave, 
daring,  chivalrous  ;  what  can  be  the  cause  of  their  present  unhappy  state  ? 
The  "accursed"  tariff  presents  itself  to  their  excited  imaginations,  and  they 
blindly  rush  into  the  ranks  of  those  who,  unfurling  the  banner  of  nullifi- 
cation, would  place  a  State  upon  its  sovereignty  ! 

The  danger  to  our  Union  does  not  lie  on  the  side  of  persistence  in  the 
American  system,  but  on  that  of  its  abandonment.  If,  as  I  have  supposed 
and  believe,  the  inhabitants  of  all  north  and  east  of  James  river,  and  all 
west  of  the  mountains,  including  Louisiana,  are  deeply  interested  in  the 
preservation  of  that  system,  would  they  be  reconciled  to  its  overthrow  ? 
Can  it  be  expected  that  two  thirds,  if  not  three  fourths,  of  the  people  of 


480  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

the  United  States,  would  consent  to  the  destruction  of  a  policy,  believed 
to  be  indispensably  necessary  to  their  prosperity  ?  When,  too,  the  sacri- 
fice is  made  at  the  instance  of  a  single  interest,  which  they  verily  believe 
will  not  be  promoted  by  it  ?  In  estimating  the  degree  of  peril  which  may 
be  incident  to  two  opposite  courses  of  human  policy,  the  statesman  would 
be  short-sighted  who  should  content  himself  with  viewing  only  the  evils, 
real  or  imaginary,  which  belong  to  that  course  which  is  in  practical  ope- 
ration. He  should  lift  himself  up  to  the  contemplation  of  those  greater 
and  more  certain  daugers  which  might  inevitably  attend  the  adoption  of 
the  alternative  course.  What  would  be  the  condition  of  this  Union,  if 
Pennsylvania  and  New  York,  those  mammoth  members  of  our  confederacy, 
were  firmly  persuaded  that  their  industry  was  paralyzed,  and  their  pros- 
perity blighted,  by  the  enforcement  of  the  British  colonial  system,  under 
the  delusive  name  of  free  trade  ?  They  are  now  tranquil,  and  happy,  and 
contented,  conscious  of  their  welfare,  and  feeling  a  salutary  and  rapid  cir- 
culation of  the  products  of  home  manufactures  and  home  industry, 
throughout  all  their  great  arteries.  But  let  that  be  checked,  let  them  feel 
that  a  foreign  system  is  to  predominate,  and  the  sources  of  their  subsist- 
ence and  comfort  dried  up  ;  let  New  England  and  the  West,  and  the  middle 
States,  all  feel  that  they  too  are  the  victims  of  a  mistaken  policy,  and  let 
these  vast  portions  of  our  country  despair  of  any  favorable  change,  and 
then  indeed  might  we  tremble  for  the  continuance  and  safety  of  this  Union. 
And  need  I  remind  you,  sir,  that  this  dereliction  of  the  duty  of  protect- 
ing our  domestic  industry,  aud  abandonment  of  it  to  the  fate  of  foreign 
legislation,  would  be  directly  at  war  with  leading  considerations  which 
prompted  the  adoption  of  the  present  Constitution  ?  The  States  respect- 
ively surrendered  to  the  general  government  the  whole  power  of  laying 
imposts  on  foreign  goods.  They  stripped  themselves  of  all  power  to  pro- 
tect their  own  manufactures,  by  the  most  efficacious  means  of  encourage- 
ment— the  imposition  of  duties  on  rival  foreign  fabrics.  Did  they  create 
that  great  trust,  did  they  voluntarily  subject  themselves  to  this  self-restric- 
tion, that  the  power  should  remain  in  the  federal  government  inactive,  un- 
executed, and  lifeless  ?  Mr.  Madison,  at  the  commencement  of  the  gov- 
ernment, told  you  otherwise.  In  discussing  at  that  early  period  this  very 
subject,  he  declared  that  a  failure  to  exercise  this  power  would  be  a  "  fraud" 
upon  the  northern  States,  to  which  may  now  be  added  the  middle  and 
western  States. 

[Governor  Miller  asked  to  what  expression  of  Mr.  Madison's  opinion  Mr. 
Clay  referred ;  and  Mr.  Clay  replied,  his  opinion,  expressed  in  the  House  of 
Eepresentatives  in  1789,  as  reported  in  Lloyd's  Congressional  Debates.] 

Gentlemen  are  greatly  deceived  as  to  the  hold  which  this  system  has  on 
the  affections  of  the  people  of  the  United  States'.  They  represent  that  it 
is  the  policy  of  New  England,  and  that  she  is  most  benefited  by  it.  If 
there  be  any  part  of  this  Union  which  has  been  most  steady,  most  unani- 


ON   THE    AMERICAN   SYSTEM.  481 

mous,  and  most  determined  in  its  support,  it  is  Pennsylvania.  Why  is  not 
that  powerful  State  attacked  ?  Why  pass  her  over,  and  aim  the  blow  at 
New  England  ?  New  England  came  reluctantly  into  the  policy.  In  1824, 
a  majority  of  her  delegation  was  opposed  to  it.  From  the  largest  State 
of  New  England  there  was  but  a  solitary  vote  in  favor  of  the  bill.  That 
enterprising  people  can  readily  accommodate  their  industry  to  any  policy, 
provided  it  be  settled.  They  supposed  this  was  fixed,  and  they  submitted 
to  the  decrees  of  government.  And  the  progress  of  public  opinion  has 
kept  pace  with  the  developments  of  the  benefits  of  the  system.  Now,  all 
New  England,  at  least  in  this  House  (with  the  exception  of  one  small  still 
voice),  is  in  favor  of  the  system.  In  1824,  all  Maryland  was  against  it ; 
now  the  majority  is  for  it.  Then,  Louisiana,  with  one  exception,  was  op- 
posed to  it ;  now,  without  any  exception,  she  is  in  favor  of  it.  The  march 
of  public  sentiment  is  to  the  South.  Virginia  will  be  the  next  convert ; 
and  in  less  than  seven  years,  if  there  be  no  obstacles  from  political  causes, 
or  prejudices  industriously  instilled,  the  majority  of  eastern  Virginia  will 
be,  as  the  majority  of  western  Virginia  now  is,  in  favor  of  the  American 
system.  North  Carolina  will  follow  later,  but  not  less  certainly.  Eastern 
Tennessee  is  now  in  favor  of  the  system.  And,  finally,  its  doctrines  will 
pervade  the  whole  Union,  and  the  wonder  will  be,  that  they  ever  should 
have  been  opposed. 

I  have  now  to  proceed  to  notice  some  objections  which  have  been  urged 
against  the  resolution  under  consideration.  With  respect  to  the  amend- 
ment which  the  gentleman  from  South  Carolina  has  offered,  as  he  has 
intimated  his  purpose  to  modify  it,  I  shall  forbear  for  the  present  to  com- 
ment upon  it.  It  is  contended  that  the  resolution  proposes  the  repeal  of 
duties  on  luxuries,  leaving  those  on  necessaries  to  remain,  and  that  it  will, 
therefore,  relieve  the  rich  without  lessening  the  burden  of  the  poor.  And 
the  gentleman  from  South  Carolina  has  carefully  selected,  for  ludicrous 
effect,  a  number  of  the  unprotected  articles,  cosmetics,  perfumes,  oranges, 
and  so  forth.  I  must  say,  that  this  exhibition  of  the  gentleman  is  not  in 
keeping  with  the  candor  which  he  has  generally  displayed  ;  that  he  knows 
very  well  that  the  duties  upon  these  articles  are  trifling,  and  that  it  is  of 
little  consequence  whether  they  are  repealed  or  retained.  Both  systems, 
the  American  and  the  foreign,  comprehend  some  articles  which  may  be 
deemed  luxuries.  The  Senate  knows  that  the  unprotected  articles  which 
yield  the  principal  part  of  the  revenue,  with  which  this  measure  would 
dispense,  are  coffee,  tea,  spices,  wines,  and  silks.  Of  all  these  articles,  wines 
and  silks  alone  can  be  pronounced  to  be  luxuries ;  and  as  to  wines,  we 
have  already  ratified  a  treaty,  not  yet  promulgated,  by  which  the  duties 
on  them  are  to  be  considerably  reduced.  If  the  universality  of  the  use  of 
objects  of  consumption  determines  their  classification,  coffee,  tea,  and 
spices,  in  the  present  condition  of  civilized  society,  may  be  considered  nee 
essarios.  Even  if  they  were  luxuries,  why  should  not  the  poor,  by  cheap- 
ening their  prices,  if  that  can  be  effected,  be  allowed  to  use  them  ?     Why 

31 


482  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY    CLAY. 

should  not  a  poor  man  be  allowed  to  tie  a  silk  handkerchief  on  his  neck, 
occasionally  regale  himself  with  a  glass  of  cheap  French  wine,  or  present 
his  wife  or  daughter  with  a  silk  gown,  to  be  worn  on  Sabbath  or  gala  days? 
I  am  quite  sure  that  I  do  not  misconstrue  the  feelings  of  the  gentleman's 
heart,  in  supposing  that  he  would  be  happy  to  see  the  poor  as  well  as  the 
rich  moderately  indulging  themselves  in  those  innocent  gratifications.  For 
one,  I  am  delighted  to  see  the  condition  of  the  poor  attracting  the  con- 
sideration of  the  opponents  of  the  tariff.  It  is  for  the  great  body  of  the 
people,  and  especially  for  the  poor,  that  I  have  ever  supported  the  Amer- 
ican system.  It  affords  them  profitable  employment,  and  supplies  tlie 
means  of  comfortable  subsistence.  It  secures  to  them,  certainly,  neces- 
saries of  life,  manufactured  at  home,  and  at  places  within  their  reach,  and 
enables  them  to  acquire  a  reasonable  share  of  foreign  luxuries ;  while  the 
system  of  gentlemen  promises  them  necessaries  made  in  foreign  countries, 
and  which  are  beyond  their  power,  and  denies  to  them  luxuries,  which 
they  would  possess  no  means  to  purchase. 

The  constant  complaint  of  South  Carolina  against  the  tariff,  is,  that  it 
checks  importations,  and  disables  foreign  powers  from  purchasing  the 
agricultural  productions  of  the  United  States.  The  effect  of  the  resolution 
will  be  to  increase  importations,  not  so  much,  it  is  true,  from  Great  Britain, 
as  from  the  other  powers,  but  not  the  less  acceptable  on  that  account.  It 
is  a  misfortune  that  so  large  a  portion  of  our  foreign  commerce  concen- 
trates in  one  nation ;  it  subjects  us  too  much  to  the  legislation  and  the 
policy  of  that  nation,  and  exposes  us  to  the  influence  of  her  numerous 
agents,  factors,  and  merchants.  And  it  is  not  among  the  smallest  recom- 
mendations of  the  measure  before  the  Senate,  that  its  tendency  will  be  to 
expand  our  commerce  with  France,  our  great  revolutionary  ally,  the  land 
of  our  Lafayette.  There  is  much  greater  probability  also  of  an  enlarge- 
ment of  the  present  demand  for  cotton  in  France  than  in  Great  Britain. 
France  engaged  later  in  the  manufacture  of  cotton,  and  has  made,  there- 
fore, less  progress.  She  has,  moreover,  no  colonies  producing  the  article  in 
abundance,  whose  industry  she  might  be  tempted  to  encourage. 

The  honorable  gentleman  from  Maryland  (General  Smith),  by  his  reply 
to  a  speech  which,  on  the  opening  of  the  subject  of  this  resolution,  I  had 
occasion  to  make,  has  rendered  it  necessary  that  I  should  take  some  notice 
of  his  observations.  The  honorable  gentleman  stated  that  he  had  been 
accused  of  partiality  to  the  manufacturing  interest.  Never  was  there  a 
more  groundless  and  malicious  charge  preferred  against  a  calumniated 
man.  Since  this  question  has  been  agitated  in  the  public  councils,  although 
I  have  often  heard  from  him  professions  of  attachment  to  this  branch  of 
industry,  I  have  never  known  any  member  a  more  uniform,  determined, 
and  uncompromising  opponent  of  them,  than  the  honorable  senator  has 
invariably  been.  And  if,  hereafter,  the  calumny  should  be  repeated,  of  his 
friendship  to  the  American  system,  I  shall  be  ready  to  furnish  to  him,  in 
the  most  solemn  manner,  my  testimony  to  his  innocence.     The  honorable 


ON   THE   AMEKICAN   SYSTEM.  483 

gentleman  supposed  that  I  had  advanced  the  idea  that  the  permanent 
revenue  of  this  country  should  he  fixed  at  eighteen  millions  of  dollars. 
Certainly  I  had  no  intention  to  announce  such  an  opinion,  nor  do  my  ex- 
pressions, fairly  interpreted,  imply  it.  I  stated,  on  the  occasion  referred  to, 
that,  estimating  the  ordinary  revenue  of  the  country  at  twenty-five  millions, 
and  the  amount  of  the  duties  on  the  unprotected  articles  proposed  to  be 
repealed  by  the  resolution  at  seven  millions,  the  latter  sum  taken  from  the 
former  would  leave  eighteen.  But  I  did  not  intimate  any  belief  that  the 
revenue  of  the  country  ought,  for  the  future,  to  be  permanently  fixed  at 
that  or  any  other  precise  sum.  I  stated  that,  after  having  effected  so  great 
a  reduction,  we  might  pause,  cautiously  survey  the  whole  ground,  and  de- 
liberately determine  upon  other  measures  of  reduction,  seme  of  which  I 
indicated.  And  I  now  say,  Preserve  the  protective  system  in  full  vigor ; 
give  us  the  proceeds  of  the  public  domain  for  internal  improvements,  or, 
if  you  please,  partly  for  that  object,  and  partly  for  the  removal  of  the  free 
blacks,  with  their  own  consent,  from  the  United  States;  and  for  one,  I 
have  no  objection  to  the  reduction  of  the  public  revenue  to  fifteen,  to  thir- 
teen, or  even  to  nine  millions  of  dollars. 

In  regard  to  the  scheme  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  for  paying  off 
the  whole  of  the  remaining  public  debt  by  the  4th  of  March,  1833,  in- 
cluding the  three  per  centum,  and  for  that  purpose  selling  the  bank  stock, 
I  had  remarked  that,  with  the  exception  of  the  three  per  centum,  there 
were  not  more  than  about  four  millions  of  dollars  of  the  debt  due  and 
payable  within  this  year ;  that  to  meet  this,  the  secretary  had  stated  in  his 
annual  report,  that  the  treasury  would  have,  from  the  receipts  of  this  year, 
fourteen  millions  of  dollars,  applicable  to  the  principal  of  the  debt ;  that  I 
did  not  perceive  any  urgency  for  paying  off  the  three  per  centum  by  the 
precise  day  suggested ;  and  that  there  was  no  necessity,  according  to  the 
plans  of  the  Treasury,  assuming  them  to  be  expedient  and  proper,  to  post- 
pone the  repeal  of  the  duties  on  unprotected  articles.  The  gentleman  from 
Maryland  imputed  to  me  ignorance  of  the  act  of  the  24th  of  April,  1830, 
according  to  which,  in  his  opinion,  the  secretary  was  obliged  to  purchase 
the  three  per  centum.  On  what  ground  the  senator  supposed  I  was 
ignorant  of  that  act,  he  has  not  stated.  Although  when  it  passed  I  was  at 
Ashland,  I  assure  him  that  I  was  not  there  altogether  uninformed  of  what 
was  passing  in  the  world.  I  regularly  received  the  Register  of  my  excel- 
lent friend  (Mr.  Niles),  published  in  Baltimore,  the  National  Intelligencer, 
and  other  papers.  There  are  two  errors  to  which  gentlemen  are  some- 
times liable ;  one  is  to  magnify  the  amount  of  knowledge  which  they 
possess  themselves,  and  the  second  is  to  depreciate  that  which  others  have 
acquired.  And  will  the  gentleman  from  Maryland  excuse  me  for  thinking 
that  no  man  is  more  prone  to  commit  both  errors  than  himself?  I  will 
not  say  that  he  is  ignorant  of  the  true  meaning  of  the  act  of  1830,  but  I 
certainly  place  a  different  construction  upon  it  from  what  he  does.  It  does 
not  oblige  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  or  rather  the  commissioners  of 


484  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

the  sinking-fund,  to  apply  the  surplus  of  any  year  to  the  purchase  of  the 
three  per  centum  stock  particularly,  but  leaves  them  at  liberty  "  to  apply 
such  surplus  to  the  purchase  of  any  portion  of.  the  public  debt  at  such 
rates  as,  in  their  opinion,  may  be  advantageous  to  the  United  States." 
This  vests  a  discretionary  authority,  to  be  exercised  under  official  respon- 
sibility. And  if  any  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  when  he  had  the  option 
of  purchasing  a  portion  of  the  debt,  bearing  a  higher  rate  of  interest  at 
par  or  about  par,  were  to  execute  the  act  by  purchasing  the  three  per 
centums  at  their  present  price,  he  would  merit  impeachment.  Undoubtedly 
a  state  of  fact  may  exist,  such  as  there  being  no  public  debt  remaining  to 
be  paid  but  the  three  per  centum  stock,  with  a  surplus  in  the  Treasury, 
idle  and  unproductive,  in  which  it  might  be  expedient  to  apply  that  surplus 
to  the  reimbursement  of  the  three  per  centums.  But  while  the  interest  of 
money  is  at  a  greater  rate  than  three  per  centum,  it  would  not,  I  think,  be 
wise  to  produce  an  accumulation  of  public  treasure  for  such  a  purpose. 
The  postponement  of  any  reduction  of  the  amount  of  the  revenue  at  this 
session  must,  however,  give  rise  to  that  very  accumulation ;  and  it  is, 
therefore,  that  I  can  not  perceive  the  utility  of  the  postponement. 

We  are  told  by  the  gentleman  from  Maryland,  that  offers  have  been 
made  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  to  exchange  three  per  centums,  at 
their  market  price  of  ninety-six  per  centum,  for  the  bank  stock  of  the  gov- 
ernment at  his  market  price,  which  is  about  one  hundred  and  twenty-six, 
and  he  thinks  it  would  be  wise  to  accept  them.  If  the  charter  of  the  bank 
is  renewed  that  stock  will  be  probably  worth  much  more  than  its  present 
price ;  if  not  renewed,  much  less.  Would  it  be  fair  in  government,  while 
the  question  is  pending  and  undecided,  to  make  such  an  exchange  ?  The 
difference  in  value  between  a  stock  bearing  three  per  centum  and  one  bear- 
ing seven  per  centum  must  be  really  much  greater  than  the  difference  be- 
tween ninety-six  and  one  hundred  and  twenty-six  per  centum.  Supposing 
them  to  be  perpetual  annuities,  the  one  would  be  worth  more  than  twice 
the  value  of  the  other.  But  my  objection  to  the  treasury  plan  is,  that 
it  is  not  necessary  to  execute  it — to  continue  these  duties  as  the  sec- 
retary proposes.  The  secretary  has  a  debt  of  twenty-four  millions  to  pay . 
he  has  from  the  accruing  receipts  of  this  year  fourteen  millions,  and  we 
are  now  told  by  the  senator  from  Maryland,  that  this  sum  of  fourteen  mil- 
lions is  exclusive  of  any  of  the  duties  accruing  this  year.  He  proposes 
to  raise  eight  millions  by  the  sale  of  the  bank  stock,  and  to  anticipate 
from  the  revenue  receivable  next  year,  two  millions  more.  These  three 
items,  then,  of  fourteen  millions,  eight  millions,  and  two  millions,  make  up 
the  sum  required,  of  twenty-four  millions,  without  the  aid  of  the  duties 
to  which  the  resolution  relates. 

The  gentleman  from  Maryland  insists  that  the  general  government  has 
been  liberal  toward  the  West  in  its  appropriations  of  public  lands  for  in- 
ternal improvements ;  and,  as  to  fortifications,  he  contends  that  the  ex- 
penditures near  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi  are  for  its  especial  benefit. 


ON  THE   AMERICAN   SYSTEM.  485 

The  appropriations  of  land  to  the  States  of  Ohio,  Indiana,  Illinois,  and 
Alabama,  have  been  liberal ;  but  it  is  not  to  be  overlooked,  that  the  gen- 
eral government  is  itself  the  greatest  proprietor  of  land,  and  that  a  tend- 
ency of  the  improvements,  which  these  appropriations  were  to  effect,  is 
to  increase  the  value  of  the  unsold  public  domain.  The  erection  of  the 
fortifications  for  the  defense  of  Louisiana  was  highly  proper ;  but  the 
gentleman  might  as  well  place  to  the  account  of  the  West,  the  disburse- 
ment for  the  fortifications  intended  to  defend  Baltimore,  Philadelphia,  and 
New  York,  to  all  which  capitals  western  produce  is  sent,  and  in  the  se- 
curity of  all  of  which  the  western  people  feel  a  lively  interest.  They  do 
not  object  to  expenditures  for  the  army,  for  the  navy,  for  fortifications,  or 
for  any  other  offensive  or  commercial  object  on  the  Atlantic,  but  they  do 
think  that  their  condition  ought  also  to  receive  friendly  attention  from  the 
general  government.  With  respect  to  the  State  of  Kentucky,  not  one  cent 
of  money,  or  one  acre  of  land  has  been  applied  to  any  object  of  internal 
improvement  within  her  limits.  The  subscription  to  the  stock  of  the  canal 
at  Louisville  was  for  an  object  in  which  many  States  were  interested.  The 
senator  from  Maryland  complains  that  he  has  been  unable  to  attain  any  aid 
for  the  railroad  which  the  enterprise  of  Baltimore  has  projected,  and  in 
part  executed.  That  was  a  great  work,  the  conception  of  which  was  bold, 
and  highly  honorable,  and  it  deserves  national  encouragement.  But  how 
has  the  committee  of  roads  and  canals,  at  this  session,  been  constituted  ? 
The  senator  from  Maryland  possessed  a  brief  authority  to  organize  it,  and, 
if  I  am  not  misinformed,  a  majority  of  the  members  composing  it,  appoint- 
ed by  him,  are  opposed  both  to  the  constitutionality  of  the  power,  and  the 
expediency  of  exercising  it. 

And  now,  sir,  I  would  address  a  few  words  to  the  friends  of  the  Amer- 
ican system  in  the  Senate.  The  revenue  must,  ought  to  be,  reduced.  The 
country  will  not,  after  by  the  payment  of  the  public  debt  ten  or  twelve 
millions  of  dollars  become  unnecessary,  bear  such  an  annual  surplus.  Its 
distribution  would  form  a  subject  of  perpetual  contention.  Some  of  the 
opponents  of  the  system  understand  the  stratagem  by  which  to  attack  it, 
and  are  shaping  their  course  accordingly.  It  is  to  crush  the  system  by 
the  accumulation  of  revenue,  and  by  the  effort  to  persuade' the  people  that 
they  are  unnecessarily  taxed,  while  those  would  really  tax  them  who  would 
break  up  the  native  sources  of  supply,  and  render  them  dependent  upon 
the  foreign.  But  the  revenue  ought  to  be  reduced,  so  as  to  accommodate 
it  to  the  fact  of  the  payment  of  the  public  debt.  And  the  alternative  is,  or 
may  be,  to  preserve  the  protecting  system,  and  repeal  the  duties  on  the 
unprotected  articles,  or  to  preserve  the  duties  on  unprotected  articles,  and 
endanger,  if  not  destroy,  the  system.  Let  us  then  adopt  the  measure  before 
us,  which  will  benefit  all  classes — the  farmer,  the  professional  man,  the 
merchant,  the  manufacturer,  the  mechanic;  and  the  cotton  planter  more 
than  all.  A  few  months  ago  there  was  no  diversity  of  opinion  as  to  the 
expediency  of  this  measure.     All,  then,  seemed  to  unite  in  the  selection  of 


486  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

these  objects  for  a  repeal  of  duties  which  were  not  produced  within  the 
country.  Such  a  repeal  did  not  touch  our  domestic  industry,  violated  no 
principle,  offended  no  prejudice. 

Can  we  not  all,  whatever  may  be  our  favorite  theories,  cordially  unite  on 
this  neutral  ground  ?  When  that  is  occupied,  let  us  look  beyond  it,  and 
see  if  any  thing  can  be  done  in  the  field  of  protection,  to  modify,  to  improve 
it,  or  to  satisfy  those  who  are  opposed  to  the  system.  Our  southern  breth- 
ren believe  that  it  is  injurious  to  them,  and  ask  its  repeal.  We  believe 
that  its  abandonment  will  be  prejudicial  to  them,  and  ruinous  to  every  other 
section  of  the  Union.  However  strong  their  convictions  may  be,  they  are 
not  stronger  than  ours.  Between  the  points  of  the  preservation  of  the  sys- 
tem and  its  absolute  repeal,  there  is  no  principle  of  union.  If  it  can  be 
shown  to  operate  immoderately  on  any  quarter ;  if  the  measure  of  protec- 
tion to  any  article  can  be  demonstrated  to  be  undue  and  inordinate,  it 
would  be  the  duty  of  Congress  to  interpose  and  apply  a  remedy.  And 
none  will  co-operate  more  heartily  than  I  shall  in  the  performance  of  that 
duty.  It  is  quite  probable  that  beneficial  modifications  of  the  system  may 
be  made  without  impairing  its  efficacy.  But  to  make  it  fulfill  the  purposes 
of  its  institution,  the  measure  of  protection  ought  to  be  adequate.  If  it 
be  not,  all  interests  will  be  injuriously  affected.  The  maufacturer,  crippled 
in  his  exertions,  will  produce  less  perfect  and  dearer  fabrics,  and  the  con- 
sumer will  feel  the  consequence.  This  is  the  spirit,  and  these  are  the  prin- 
ciples only,  on  which  it  seems  to  me  that  a  settlement  of  the  great  question 
can  be  made,  satisfactorily  to  all  parts  of  our  Union. 


ON   THE    PUBLIC    LANDS. 

IN  SENATE,  JUNE  20,  1832. 

[It  was  truly  unfortunate  for  the  country  that  some  of  Mr. 
Clay's  most  beneficent  schemes  for  the  public  good,  should  have 
been  frustrated  by  a  jealousy  "of  his  fame  and  influence.  This 
was  especially  true  in  the  result  of  his  long-protracted  endeavor 
to  secure  an  equitable  distribution  of  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of  the 
public  domain  among  the  States.  This  immense  property  was 
pledged  for  the  public  debt  ;  but  when  the  national  debt  was 
about  being  paid  off,  the  question  arose,  What  should  be  done 
with  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of  the  public  lands  ?  In  a  mes- 
sage to  the  Twenty-second  Congress,  General  Jackson  recom- 
mended, that  the  unsold  public  lands,  lying  within  any  of  the 
States,  should  be  ceded  to  those  States — a  policy  which,  of 
course,  if  adopted,  would  apply  to  all  new  States,  as  they  should 
come  into  the  Union,  and  which  would  naturally  engender  a 
wild  speculation  in  the  settlement  of  new  territories  with  that 
view.  Nothing  could  be  more  unjust  to  the  old  thirteen  States 
than  this  proposal,  for  it  was  chiefly  at  the  expense  of  the  Old 
Thirteen — expense  of  blood  and  treasure — that  the  public  do- 
main was  acquired.  But  General  Jackson  wished  to  throw  out 
a  sop  to  the  new  States,  where  much  of  his  strength  lay  ;  and 
knowing  that  Mr.  Clay's  policy  was  equal  justice  to  all  the 
States,  he  rushed  into  the  opposite  extreme,  apparently  for  no 
other  reason  than  to  oppose  Mr.  Clay.  The  Jackson  party,  be- 
in«-  a  majority  in  the  Senate,  referred  the  subject  of  public  lands 
to  the  committee  on  manufactures,  of  which  Mr.  Clay  was  chair- 
man. This,  in  itself,  requires  explanation,  since  the  subject 
naturally  belonged  to  the  committee  on  public  lands.  Jackson 
and  Clay  were  both  candidates  for  the  presidency,  and  the  Jack- 
son party  in  the  Senate  wished  to  get  a  report  from  Mr.  Clay  on 
the  public  lands,  which  would  injure  him  in  the  West.  Hence 
the  absurd  reference  of  the  subject  to  the  committee  on  manu- 
factures.    Mr.  Clay,  however,  as  chairman  of  that  committee, 


488  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

took  up  the  subject,  and  made  a  report,  which  was  a  perfect  dis- 
appointment to  those  who  meant  to  put  him  in  an  embarrassing 
position,  and  greatly  increased  his  popularity  throughout  the 
country.  Chagrined  by  this  result,  the  Senate  immediately  re- 
ferred the  subject — where  it  ought  to  have  gone  at  first,  but 
where  it  was  very  improper  to  send  it  now — to  the  committee  on 
public  lands.  But  Mr.  Clay's  report  was  the  only  thing  there- 
after which  could  be  entertained,  in  Congress  or  in  the  country. 
It  was  afterwards  passed  by  both  Houses  of  Congress,  and 
vetoed  by  General  Jackson.  With  the  exception  of  the  loan 
act,  here  the  subject  lay,  till  a  Whig  Congress  came  in  with 
General  Harrison,  in  1841,  when  Mr.  Clay  again  brought  for- 
ward his  land  bill,  which  was  passed  by  Congress,  in  a  modified 
form,  adapted  to  the  time.  But  it  was  too  late  to  carry  out  the 
beneficent  plan,  which  was  frustrated  by  General  Jackson's  veto. 
A  fair  distribution  of  the  proceeds  of  the  public  lands  among 
the  States  would  have  afforded  them  great  facilities  for  internal 
improvement.] 

In  rising  to  address  the  Senate,  I  owe,  in  the  first  place,  the  expression 
of  my  hearty  thanks  to  the  majority,  by  whose  vote,  just  given,  I  am  in- 
dulged in  occupying  the  floor  on  this  most  important  question.  I  am 
happy  to  see  that  the  days  when  the  sedition  acts  and  gag  laws  were  in 
force,  and  when  screws  were  applied  for  the  suppression  of  the  freedom  of 
speech  and  debate,  are  not  yet  to  return  ;  and  that,  when  the  consideration 
of  a  great  question  has  been  specially  assigned  to  a  particular  day,  it  is  not 
allowed  to  he  arrested  and  thrust  aside  by  any  unexpected  and  unprece- 
dented parliamentary  maneuver.  The  decision  of  the  majority  demonstrates 
that  feelings  of  liberality,  and  courtesy,  and  kindness,  still  prevail  in  the 
Senate  ;  and  that  they  will  be  extended  even  to  one  of  the  humblest  mem- 
bers of  the  body  ;  for  such,  I  assure  the  Senate,  I  feel  myself  to  be. 

It  may  not  be  amiss  again  to  allude  to  the  extraordinary  reference  of 
the  subject  of  the  public  lands  to  the  committee  on  manufactures.  I  have 
nothing  to  do  with  the  motives  of  honorable  senators  who  composed  the 
majority  by  which  that  reference  was  ordered.  The  decorum  proper  in 
this  hall  obliges  me  to  consider  their  motives  to  have  been  pure  and  patri- 
otic. But  still  I  must  be  permitted  to  regard  the  proceeding  as  very  un- 
usual. The  Senate  has  a  standing  committee  on  the  public  lands,  appoint- 
ed under  lonof-established  rules.  The  members  of  that  committee  are 
presumed  to  be  well  acquainted  with  the  subject ;  they  have  some  of  them 
occupied  the  same  station  for  many  years,  are  well  versed  in  the  whole 
legislation  on  the  public  lands,  and  familiar  with  every  branch  of  it ;  and 
four  out  of  five  of  them  come  frorn  the  new  States.  Yet,  with  a  full 
knowledge  of  all  these  circumstances,  a  reference  was  ordered  by  a  major- 


ON  THE  PUBLIC  LANDS.  489 

ity  of  the  Senate  to  the  committee  on  manufactures — a  committee  than 
■which  there  is  not  another  standing  committee  of  the  Senate,  whose  pre- 
scribed duties  are  more  incongruous  with  the  public  domain.  It  happened, 
in  the  constitution  of  the  committee  of  manufactures,  that  there  was  not  a 
solitary  senator  from  the  new  States,  and  but  one  from  any  western  State. 
We  earnestly  protested  against  the  reference,  and  insisted  upon  its  impro- 
priety ;  but  we  were  overruled  by  the  majority,  including  a  majority  of 
senators  from  the  new  States.  I  will  not  attempt  an  expression  of  the 
feelings  excited  in  my  mind  on  that  occasion.  AVhatever  may  have  been 
the  intention  of  honorable  senators,  I  could  not  be  insensible  to  the  embar- 
rassment in  which  the  committee  on  manufactures  was  placed,  and  especi- 
ally myself.  Although  any  other  member  of  that  committee  could  have 
rendered  himself,  with  appropriate  researches  and  proper  time,  more  com- 
petent than  I  was  to  understand  the  subject  of  the  public  lands,  it  was 
known  that,  from  my  local  position,  I  alone  was  supposed  to  have  any  par- 
ticular knowledge  of  them.  Whatever  emanated  from  the  committee  was 
likely,  therefore,  to  be  ascribed  to  me.  If  the  committee  should  propose  a 
measure  of  great  liberality  toward  the  new  States,  the  old  States  might 
complain.  If  the  measure  should  seem  to  lean  toward  the  old  States,  the 
new  might  be  dissatisfied.  And  if  it  inclined  to  neither  class  of  States,  but 
recommended  a  plan  according  to  which  there  would  be  distributed  impar- 
tial justice  among  all  the  States,  it  was  far  from  certain  that  any  would  be 
pleased. 

Without  venturing  to  attribute  to  honorable  senators  the  purpose  of  pro- 
ducing this  personal  embarrassment,  I  felt  it  as  a  necessary  consequence  of 
their  act,  just  as  much  as  if  it  had  been  in  their  contemplation.  Never- 
theless, the  committee  of  manufactures  cheerfully  entered  upon  the  duty 
which,  against  its  will,  was  thus  assigned  to  it  by  the  Senate.  And  for  the 
causes  already  noticed,  that  of  preparing  a  report  and  suggesting  some 
measure  embracing  the  whole  subject,  devolved  in  the  committee  upon  me. 
The  general  features  cf  our  land  system  were  strongly  impressed  on  my 
memory  ;  but  I  found  it  necessary  to  re-examine  some  of  the  treaties,  deeds 
of  cession,  and  laws,  which  related  to  the  acquisition  and  administration 
of  the  public  lands ;  and  then  to  think  of,  and,  if  possible,  strike  out  some 
project,  which  without  inflicting  injury  upon  any  of  the  States,  might  deal 
equally  and  justly  with  all  of  them.  The  report  and  bill  submitted  to  the 
Senate,  after  having  been  previously  sanctioned  by  a  majority  of  the  com- 
mittee, were  the  results  of  this  consideration.  The  report,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  principle  of  distribution  which  concludes  it,  obtained  the  unan- 
imous concurrence  of  the  committee  on  manufactures. 

This  report  and  bill  were  hardly  read  in  the  Senate  before  they  were 
violently  denounced.  And  they  were  not  considered  by  the  Senate  before 
a  proposition  was  made  to  refer  the  report  to  that  very  committee  on  the 
public  lands  to  which,  in  the  first  instance,  I  contended  the  subject  ought 
to  have  been  assigned.     It  was  in  vain  that  we  remonstrated  against  such 


490  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

a  proceeding,  as  unprecedented,  as  implying  unmerited  censure  on  the 
committee  on  manufactures,  as  leading  to  interminable  references ;  for 
what  more  reason  could  there  be  to  refer  the  report  of  the  committee  on 
manufactures  to  the  land  committee,  than  would  exist  for  a  subsequent  ref- 
erence of  the  report  of  this  committee,  when  made,  to  some  third  com- 
mittee, and  so  in  an  endless  circle  ?  In  spite  of  all  our  remonstrances,  the 
same  majority,  with  but  little  if  any  variation,  which  Lad  originally  re- 
solved to  refer  the  subject  to  the  committee  on  manufactures,  now  deter- 
mined to  commit  its  bill  to  the  land  committee.  And  this  not  only  with- 
out particular  examination  into  the  merits  of  that  bill,  but  without  the 
avowal  of  any  specific  amendment  which  was  deemed  necessary  !  The 
committee  on  public  lands,  after  the  lapse  of  some  days,  presented  a  report, 
and  recommended  a  reduction  of  the  price  of  the  public  lands  immediately 
to  one  dollar  per  acre,  and  eventually  to  fifty  cents  per  acre  ;  and  the  grant 
to  the  new  States  of  fifteen  per  centum  on  the  net  proceeds  of  the  sales, 
instead  of  ten,  as  proposed  by  the  committee  on  manufactures,  and  nothing 
to  the  old  States. 

And  now,  Mr.  President,  I  desire  at  this  time,  to  make  a  few  observations 
in  illustration  of  the  original  report;  to  supply  some  omissions  in  its  com- 
position ;  to  say  something  as  to  the  power  and  rights  of  the  general  gov- 
ernment over  the  public  domain ;  to  submit  a  few  remarks  on  the  counter 
report ;  and  to  examine  the  assumptions  which  it  contained,  and  the  prin- 
ciples on  which  it  was  founded. 

No  subject  which  had  presented  itself  to  the  present,  or  perhaps  any 
preceding  Congress,  was  of  greater  magnitude  than  that  of  the  public 
lands.  There  was  another,  indeed,  which  possessed  a  more  exciting  and 
absorbing  interest ;  but  the  excitement  was  hap>pily  but  temporary  in  its 
nature.  Long  after  we  shall  cease  to  be  agitated  by  the  tariff,  ages  after 
our  manufactures  shall  have  acquired  a  stability  and  perfection  which  will 
enable  them  successfully  to  cope  with  the  manufactures  of  any  other 
country,  the  public  lands  will  remain  a  subject  of  deep  and  enduring  in- 
terest. In  whatever  view  we  contemplate  them,  there  is  no  question  of 
such  vast  importance.  As  to  their  extent,  there  is  public  land  enough  to 
found  an  empire ;  stretching  across  the  immense  continent,  from  the 
Atlantic  to  the  Pacific  ocean,  from  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  to  the  north- 
western lakes,  the  quantity,  according  to  official  surveys  and  estimates, 
amounting  to  the  prodigious  sum  of  one  billion  and  eighty  millions  of 
acres  !  As  to  the  duration  of  the  interest  regarded  as  a  source  of  comfort 
to  our  people,  and  of  public  income  —during  the  past  year,  when  the 
greatest  quantity  was  sold  that  ever,  in  one  year,  had  been  previously 
sold,  it  amounted  to  less  than  three  millions  of  acres,  producing  three 
millions  and  a  half  of  dollars.  Assuming  that  year  as  affording  the 
standard  rate  at  which  the  lauds  will  be  annually  sold,  it  would  require 
three  hundred  years  to  dispose  of  them.  But  the  sales  will  probably  be 
accelerated  from  increased  population,  and  other  causes.     We  may  safely, 


ON    THE    PUBLIC    LANDS.  491 

however,  anticipate  that  long,  if  not  centuries,  after  the  present  day,  the 
representatives  of  our  children's  children  may  be  deliberating  in  the  halls 
of  Congress,  on  laws  relating  to  the  public  lands. 

The  subject,  in  otber  points  of  view,  challenged  the  fullest  attention  of 
an  American  statesman.  If  there  were  any  one  circumstance  more  than 
all  others  which  distinguished  our  happy  condition  from  that  of  the  na- 
tions of  the  old  world,  it  was  the  possession  of  this  vast  national  property, 
and  the  resources  which  it  afforded  to  our  people  and  our  government.  No 
European  nation  (possibly  with  the  exception  of  Russia),  commanded  such 
an  ample  resource.  With  respect  to  the  other  republics  of  this  continent, 
we  have  no  information  that  any  of  them  have  yet  adopted  a  regular  system 
of  previous  survey  and  subsequent  sale  of  their  wild  lands,  in  convenient 
tracts,  well  defined,  and  adapted  to  the  wants  of  all.  On  the  contrary,  the 
probability  is,  that  they  adhere  to  the  ruinous  and  mad  system  of  old 
Spain,  according  to  which  large  unsurveyed  districts  are  granted  to  favorite 
individuals,  prejudicial  to  them,  who  often  sink  under  the  incumbrance, 
and  die  in  poverty,  while  the  regular  current  of  emigration  is  checked  and 
diverted  from  its  legitimate  channels. 

And  if  there  be  in  the  operations  of  this  government  one  which  more 
than  any  other  displays  consummate  wisdom  and  statesmanship,  it  is  that 
system  by  which  the  public  lands  have  been  so  successfully  administered. 
We  should  pause,  solemnly  pause,  before  we  subvert  it.  We  should  touch 
it  hesitatingly,  and  with  the  gentlest  hand.  The  prudent  management  of 
the  public  lands,  in  the  hands  of  the  general  government,  will  be  more 
manifest  by  contrasting  it  with  that  of  several  of  the  States,  which  had  the 
disposal  of  large  bodies  of  waste  lands.  Virginia  possessed  an  ample  domain 
west  of  the  mountains,  and  in  the  present  State  of  Kentucky,  over  and 
above  her  munificent  cession  to  the  general  government.  Pressed  for  pe- 
cuniary means  by  the  revolutionary  war,  she  brought  her  wild  lands,  dur- 
ing its  progress,  into  market,  receiving  payment  in  paper  money.  There 
was  no  previous  surveys  of  the  waste  lands  ;  no  townships,  no  sections,  no 
official  definition  or  description  of  tracts.  Each  purchaser  made  his  own 
location,  describing  the  land  bought  as  he  thought  proper.  These  loca- 
tions or  descriptions  were  often  vague  and  uncertain.  The  consequence 
was,  that  the  same  tract  was  not  unfrequently  entered  at  various  times  by 
different  purchasers,  so  as  to  be  literally  shingled  over  with  conflicting 
claims.  The  State  perhaps  sold  in  this  way  much  more  land  than  it  was 
entitled  to,  but  then  it  received  nothing  in  return  that  was  valuable ; 
while  the  purchasers,  in  consequence  of  the  clashing  and  interference  be- 
tween their  rights,  were  exposed  to  tedious,  vexatious,  and  ruinous  litiga- 
tion. Kentucky  suffered  long  and  severely  from  this  cause  ;  and  is  just 
emerging  from  the  troubles  brought  upon  her  by  improvident  land  legisla- 
tion. Western  Virginia  has  also  suffered  greatly,  though  not  to  the  same 
extent. 

The  State  of  Georgia  had  large  bodies  of  waste  lands,  which  she  disposed 


492  SPEECHES   OF    HENKY    CLAY. 

of  in  a  manner  satisfactory,  no  doubt  to  herself,  but  astonishing  to  every 
one  out  of  that  commonwealth.  According  to  her  system,  waste  lands  are 
distributed  in  lotteries,  among  the  people  of  the  State,  in  conformity  with 
the  enactments  of  the  Legislature.  And  when  one  district  of  country  is 
disposed  of,  as  there  are  many  who  do  not  draw  prizes,  the  unsuccessful 
call  out  for  fresh  distributions.  These  are  made  from  time  to  time,  as 
lands  are  acquired  from  the  Indians ;  and  hence  one  of  the  causes  of  the 
avidity  with  which  the  Indian  lands  are  sought.  It  is  manifest  that 
neither  the  present  generation,  nor  posterity,  can  derive  much  advan- 
tage from  this  mode  of  alienating  public  lands.  On  the  contrary,  I 
should  think,  it  can  not  fail  to  engender  speculation  and  a  spirit  of 
gambling. 

The  State  of  Kentucky,  in  virtue  of  a  compact  with  Virginia,  acquired  a 
right  to  a  quantity  of  public  lands  south  of  Green  river.  Neglecting  to 
profit  by  the  example  of  the  parent  State,  she  ditl  not  order  the  country  to 
be  surveyed  previous  to  its  being  offered  to  purchasers.  Seduced  by  some 
of  those  wild  land  projects,  of  which  at  all  times  there  have  been  some 
afloat,  and  which,  hitherto,  the  general  government  alone  has  firmly  resist- 
ed, she  was  tempted  to  offer  her  waste  land  to  settlers,  at  different  prices, 
under  the  name  of  head-rights  or  pre-emptions.  As  the  laws,  like  most 
legislation  upon  such  subjects,  were  somewhat  loosely  worded,  the  keen 
eye  of  the  speculator  soon  discerned  the  defects,  and  he  took  advantage  of 
them.  Instances  had  occurred  of  masters  obtaining  certificates  of  head- 
rights  in  the  name  of  their  slaves,  and  thus  securing  the  land,  in  contra- 
vention of  the  intention  of  the  Legislature.  Slaves,  generally,  have  but 
one  name,  being  called  Tom,  Jack,  Dick,  or  Harry.  To  conceal  the  fraud, 
the  owner  would  add  Black,  or  some  other  cognomination,  so  that  the  cer- 
tificate would  read,  Tom  Black,  Jack  Black,  and  so  forth.  The  gentleman 
from  Tennessee  (Mr.  Grundy),  will  remember,  some  twenty -odd  years  ago, 
when  we  were  both  members  of  the  Kentucky  Legislature,  that  I  took  oc- 
casion to  animadvert  upon  these  fraudulent  practices,  and  observed,  that 
when  the  names  came  to  be  alphabeted,  the  truth  would  be  told,  whatever 
might  be  the  language  of  the  record ;  for  the  alphabet  would  read  Black 
Torn,  Black  Harry,  and  so  forth,  Kentucky  realized  more  in  her  treasury 
than  the  parent  State  had  done,  considering  that  she  had  but  a  remnant 
of  public  lands,  and  she  added  somewhat  to  her  population.  But  they 
were  far  less  available  than  they  would  have  been  under  a  system  of  pre- 
vious survey  and  regular  sale. 

These  observations,  in  respect  to  the  course  of  the  respectable  States 
referred  to,  in  relation  to  their  public  lands,  are  not  prompted  by  any  un- 
kind feelings  toward  them,  but  to  show  the  superiority  of  the  land  system 
of  the  United  States. 

Under  the  system  of  the  general  government,  the  wisdom  of  which,  in 
some  respects,  is  admitted,  even  by  the  report  of  the  land  committee,  the 
country  subject  to  its  operation,  beyond  the  Alleghany  mountains,  has  rap- 


ON  THE  PUBLIC  LANDS.  493 

idly  advanced  in  population,  improvement,  and  prosperity.  The  example 
of  the  State  on  Ohio  was  emphatically  relied  on  by  the  report  of  the  com- 
mittee of  manufactures — its  million  of  people,  its  canals,  and  other  im- 
provements, its  flourishing  towns,  its  highly-cultivated  fields,  all  put  there 
within  less  than  forty  years.  To  weaken  the  force  of  this  example,  the 
land  committee  deny  that  the  population  of  the  State  is  principally  settled 
upon  public  lands  derived  from  the  general  government.  But,  Mr.  Presi- 
dent, with  great  deference  to  that  committee,  I  must  say,  that  it  labors 
under  misapprehension.  Three  fourths,  if  not  four  fifths  of  the  population 
of  that  State,  are  settled  upon  public  lands  purchased  from  the  United 
States,  and  they  are  the  most  flourishing  parts  of  the  State.  For  the  cor- 
rectness of  this  statement,  I  appeal  to  my  friend  from  Ohio  (Mr.  Ewing)} 
near  me.  He  knows,  as  well  as  I  do,  that  the  rich  valleys  of  the  Miami 
of  Ohio,  and  the  Maumee  of  the  Lake,  the  Sciota  and  the  Muskingum, 
are  principally  settled  by  persons  deriving  titles  to  their  land  from  the 
United  States. 

In  a  national  point  of  view,  one  of  the  greatest  advantages  which  these 
public  lands  in  the  West,  and  this  system  of  settling  them,  affords,  is  the 
resource  which  they  possess  against  pressure  and  want,  in  other  parts  of 
the  Union,  from  the  vocations  of  society  being  too  closely  filled,  and  too 
much  crowded.  They  constantly  tend  to  sustain  the  price  of  labor,  by 
the  opportunity  which  they  offer,  of  the  acquisition  of  fertile  land  at  a 
moderate  price,  and  the  consequent  temptation  to  emigrate  from  those 
parts  of  the  Union  Avhere  labor  may  be  badly  rewarded. 

The  progress  of  settlement,  and  the  improvement  in  the  fortunes  and 
condition  of  individuals,  under  the  operation  of  this  beneficent  system,  are 
as  simple  as  they  are  manifest.  Pioneers  of  a  more  adventurous  character, 
advancing  before  the  tide  of  emigration,  penetrate  into  the  uninhabited 
regions  of  the  West.  They  apply  the  axe  to  the  forest,  which  falls  before 
them,  or  the  plow  to  the  prairie,  deeply  sinking  its  share  in  the  unbroken 
wild  grasses  in  which  it  abounds.  They  build  houses,  plant  orchards,  en- 
close fields,  cultivate  the  earth,  and  rear  up  families  around  them.  Mean- 
time, the  tide  of  emigration  flows  upon  them,  their  improved  farms  rise 
in  value,  a  demand  for  them  takes  place,  they  sell  to  the  new  comers,  at  a 
great  advance,  and  proceed  further  west,  with  ample  means  to  purchase 
from  government,  at  reasonable  prices,  sufficient  land  for  all  the  members 
of  their  families.  Another  and  another  tide  succeeds,  the  first  pushing  on 
westwardly  the  previous  settlers,  who,  in  their  turn,  sell  out  their  farms, 
constantly  augmenting  in  price,  until  they  arrive  at  a  fixed  and  stationary 
value.  In  this  way  thousands,  and  tens  of  thousands,  are  daily  improving 
their  circumstances,  and  bettering  their  condition.  I  have  often  witnessed 
this  gratifying  progress.  On  the  same  farm  you  may  sometimes  behold) 
standing  together,  the  first  rude  cabin  of  round  and  unhewn  logs,  and 
wooden  chimneys,  the  hewed  log  house,  chinked  and  shingled,  with  stone 
or  brick  chimneys,  and,  lastly,  the  comfortable  brick  or   stone  dwelling, 


494  SPEECHES    OF   HENRY    CLAY. 

each  denoting  the  different  occupants  of  the  farm,  or  the  several  stages 
of  the  condition  of  the  same  occupant.  What  other  nation  can  boast  of 
such  an  outlet  for  its  increasing  population,  such  bountiful  means  of  pro- 
moting their  prosperity,  and  securing  their  independence  ? 

To  the  public  lands  of  the  United  States,  and  especially  to  the  existing 
system  by  which  they  are  distributed  with  so  much  regularity  and  equity, 
are  we  indebted  for  these  signal  benefits  in  our  national  condition.  And 
every  consideration  of  duty,  to  ourselves,  and  to  posterity,  enjoins  that  we 
should  abstain  from  the  adoption  of  any  wild  project  that  would  cast  away 
this  vast  national  property,  holden  by  the  general  government  in  sacred 
trust  for  the  whole  people  of  the  United  States,  and  forbids  that  we  should 
rashly  touch  a  system  which  has  been  so  successfully  tested  by  experience. 

It  has  been  only  within  a  few  years,  that  restless  men  have  thrown  be- 
fore the  public  their  visionary  plans  for  squandering  the  public  domain. 
With  the  existing  laws,  the  great  State  of  the  west  is  satisfied  and  con- 
tented. She  has  felt  their  benefit,  and  grown  great  and  powerful  under 
their  sway.  She  knows  and  testifies  to  the  liberality  of  the  general  gov- 
ernment, in  the  administration  of  the  public  lands,  extended  alike  to  her 
and  to  the  other  new  States.  There  are  no  j>etitions  from,  no  movements 
in  Ohio,  proposing  vital  and  radical  changes  in  the  system.  During  the 
long  period,  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  and  in  the  Senate,  that  her 
upright  and  unambitious  citizen,  the  first  representative  of  that  State,  and 
afterward  successively  senator  and  governor,  presided  over  the  committee 
on  public  lands,  we  heard  of  none  of  these  chimerical  schemes.  All  went 
on  smoothly,  and  quietly,  and  safely.  No  man,  in  the  sphere  within  which 
he  acted,  ever  commanded  or  deserved  the  implicit  confidence  of  Congress, 
more  than  Jeremiah  Morrow.  There  existed  a  perfect  persuasion  of  his 
entire  impartiality  and  justice  between  the  old  States  and  the  new.  A  few 
artless  but  sensible  words,  pronounced  in  his  plain  Scotch-Irish  dialect,  were 
always  sufficient  to  insure  the  passage  of  any  bill  or  resolution  which  he 
reported.  For  about  twenty -five  years,  there  was  no  essential  change  in 
the  system  ;  and  that  which  was  at  last  made,  varying  the  price  of  the 
public  lands  from  two  dollars,  at  which  it  had  all  that  time  remained,  to 
one  dollar  and  a  quarter,  at  which  it  has  been  fixed  only  about  ten  or 
twelve  years,  was  founded  mainly  on  the  consideration  of  abolishing  the 
previous  credits. 

Assuming  the  duplication  of  our  population  in  terms  of  twenty-five 
years,  the  demand  for  waste  land,  at  the  end  of  every  term,  will  at  least 
be  double  what  it  was  at  the  commencement.  But  the  ratio  of  the  in- 
creased demand  will  be  much  greater  than  the  increase  of  the  whole 
population  of  the  United  States,  because  the  western  States  nearest  to,  or 
including  the  public  lands,  populate  much  more  rapidly  than  other  parts 
of  the  Union  ;  and  it  will  be  from  them  that  the  greatest  current  of  emi- 
gration will  flow.  At  this  moment,  Ohio,  Kentucky,  and  Tennessee,  are 
the  most  migrating  States  in  the  Union. 


ON  THE  PUBLIC  LANDS.  495 

To  supply  the  constantly-augmenting  demand,  the  policy,  which  lias 
hitherto  characterized  the  general  government,  has  heen  highly  liberal 
both  toward  individuals  and  the  new  States.  Large  tracts,  far  surpassing 
the  demand  of  purchasers,  in  every  climate  and  situation,  adapted  to  the 
wants  of  all  parts  of  the  Union,  are  brought  into  market  at  moderate 
prices,  the  government  having  sustained  all  the  expense  of  the  original 
purchase,  and  of  surveying,  marking,  and  dividing  the  land.  For  fifty 
dollars  any  poor  man  may  purchase  forty  acres  of  first-rate  land  ;  and,  for 
less  than  the  wages  of  one  year's  labor,  he  may  buy  eighty  acres.  To  the 
new  States,  also,  has  the  government  been  liberal  and  generous  in  the 
grants  for  schools  and  for  internal  improvements,  as  well  as  in  reducing 
the  debt,  contracted  for  the  purchase  of  lands,  by  the  citizens  of  those 
States,  who  were  tempted,  in  a  spirit  of  inordinate  speculation,  to  purchase 
too  much,  or  at  too  high  prices. 

Such  is  a  rapid  outline  of  this  invaluable  national  property,  of  the  sys- 
tem which  regulates  its  management  and  distribution,  and  of  the  effects 
of  that  system.  We  might  here  pause,  and  wonder  that  there  should  be 
a  disposition  with  any  to  waste  or  throw  away  this  great  resource,  or  to 
abolish  a  system  which  has  been  fraught  with  so  many  manifest  advan- 
tages. Nevertheless,  there  are  such,  who,  impatient  with  the  slow  and 
natural  operation  of  wise  laws,  have  put  forth  various  pretensions  and  pro- 
jects concerning  the  public  lands,  within  a  few  years  past.  One  of  these 
pretensions  is,  an  assumption  of  the  sovereign  right  of  the  new  States  to 
all  the  lands  within  their  respective  limits,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  gen- 
eral government,  and  to  the  exclusion  of  all  the  people  of  the  United 
States,  those  in  the  new  States  only  excepted.  It  is  my  purpose  now  to 
trace  the  origin,  examine  the  nature,  and  expose  the  injustice,  of  this  pre- 
tension. 

This  pretension  may  be  fairly  ascribed  to  the  propositions  of  the  gentle- 
man from  Missouri  (Mr.  Benton),  to  graduate  the  public  lands,  to  reduce 
the  price,  and  cede  the  "  refuse"  lands  (a  term  which  I  believe  originated 
with  him),  to  the  States  within  which  they  lie.  Prompted,  probably,  by 
these  propositions,  a  late  governor  of  Illinois,  unwilling  to  be  outdone, 
presented  an  elaborate  message  to  the  Legislature  of  that  State,  in  which 
he  gravely  and  formally  asserted  the  right  of  that  State  to  all  the  land  of 
the  United  States,  comprehended  within  its  limits.  It  must  be  allowed 
that  the  governor  was  a  most  impartial  judge,  and  the  Legislature  a  most 
disinterested  tribunal,  to  decide  such  a  question. 

The  senator  from  Missouri  was  chanting  most  sweetly  to  the  tune, 
"  refuse  lands,"  "  refuse  lands,"  "  refuse  lands,"  on  the  Missouri  side  of  the 
Mississippi,  and  the  soft  strains  of  his  music,  having  caught  the  ear  of  his 
excellency  on  the  Illinois  side,  he  joined  in  chorus,  and  struck  an  octave 
higher.  The  senator  from  Missouri  wished  only  to  pick  up  some  crumbs 
which  fell  from  Uncle  Sam's  table ;  but  the  governor  resolved  to  grasp 
the  whole  loaf.     The  senator  modestly  claimed  only  an  old,  smoked,  re- 


496  SPEECHES   OF    HENKT    CLAY. 

jected  joint ;  but  the  stomach  of  his  excellency  yearned  after  the  whole 
hog !  The  governor  peeped  over  the  Mississippi  into  Missouri,  and  saw 
the  senator  leisurely  roaming  in  some  rich  pastures,  on  bits  of  refuse  lands. 
He  returned  to  Illinois,  and  springing  into  the  grand  prairie,  determined  to 
claim  and  occupy  it,  in  all  its  boundless  extent. 

Then  came  the  resolution  of  the  senator  from  Virginia  (Mr.  Tazewell), 
in  May,  1826,  in  the  following  words: 

"  Resolved,  that  it  is  expedient  for  the  United  States  to  cede  and  surrender 
to  the  several  States,  within  whose  limits  the  same  may  be  situated,  all  the 
right,  title,  and  interest  of  the  United  States,  to  any  lands  lying  and  being 
within  the  boundaries  of  such  States,  respectively,  upon  such  terms  and  condi- 
tions as  may  be  consistent  with  the  due  observance  of  the  public  faith,  and  with 
the  general  interest  of  the  United  States." 

The  latter  words  rendered  the  resolution  somewhat  ambiguous ;  but  still 
it  contemplated  a  cession  and  surrender.  Subsequently,  the  senator  from 
Virginia  proposed,  after  a  certain  time,  a  gratuitous  surrender  of  all  unsold 
lands,  to  be  applied  by  the  Legislature,  in  support  of  education  and  the  in- 
ternal improvement  of  the  State. 

[Here  Mr.  Tazewell  controverted  the  statement.  Mr.  Clay  called  to  the  sec- 
retary to  hand  him  the  journal  of  April,  1828,  which  he  held  up  to  the  Senate, 
and  read  from  it  the  following : 

"  The  bill  to  graduate  the  price  of  the  public  lands,  to  make  donations  thereof 
to  actual  settlers,  and  to  cede  the  refuse  to  the  States  in  which  they  He,  being 
under  consideration — 

"  Mr.  Tazewell  moved  to  insert  the  following  as  a  substitute : 

"  That  the  lands  which  shall  have  been  subject  to  sale  under  the  provisions  of 
this  act,  and  shall  remain  unsold  for  two  years,  after  having  been  offered  at 
twenty-five  cents  per  acre,  shall  be,  and  the  same  is,  ceded  to  the  State  in  which 
the  same  may  lie,  to  be  applied  by  the  Legislature  thereof  in  support  of  educa- 
tion, and  the  internal  improvement  of  the  State."] 

Thus  it  appears  not  only  that  the  honorable  senator  proposed  the  cession, 
but  showed  himself  the  friend  of  education  and  internal  improvements,  by 
means  derived  from  the  general  government.  For  this  liberal  disposition 
on  his  part,  I  believe  it  was,  that  the  State  of  Missouri  honored  a  new 
county  with  his  name.  If  he  had  carried  his  proposition,  that  State  might 
well  have  granted  a  principality  to  him. 

The  memorial  of  the  Legislature  of  Illinois,  probably  produced  by  the 
message  of  the  governor  already  noticed,  had  been  presented,  asserting  a 
claim  to  the  public  lands.  And  it  seems  (although  the  fact  had  escaped 
my  recollection  until  I  was  reminded  of  it  by  one  of  her  senators,  Mr. 
Hendricks,  the  other  day)  that  the  Legislature  of  Indiana  had  instructed 
her  senators  to  bring  foward  a  similar  claim.  At  the  last  session,  however, 
of  the  Legislature  of  that  State,  resolutions  had  passed,  instructing  her 
delegation  to  obtain  from  the  general  government  cessions  of  the  unappro- 


ON   THE   PUBLIC    LANDS.  497 

priated  public  lands,  on  the  most  favorable  terms.  It  is  clear  from  tins  last 
expression  of  the  will  of  that  Legislature,  that,  on  reconsideration,  it  be- 
lieved the  right  to  the  public  lands  to  be  in  the  general  government,  and 
not  in  the  State  of  Indiana.  For,  if  they  did  not  belong  to  the  general 
government,  it  had  nothing  to  cede ;  if  they  belonged  already  to  the  State, 
no  cession  was  necessary  to  the  perfection  of  the  right  of  the  State. 

I  will  here  submit  a  passing  observation.  If  the  general  government 
had  the  power  to  cede  the  public  lands  to  the  new  States  for  particular 
purposes,  and  on  prescribed  conditions,  its  power  must  be  unquestionable 
to  make  some  reservations  for  similar  purposes  in  behalf  of  the  old  States. 
Its  power  can  not  be  without  limit  as  to  the  new  States,  and  circumscribed 
and  restricted  as  to  the  old.  Its  capacity  to  bestow  benefits  or  dispense 
justice  is  not  confined  to  the  new  States,  but  is  coextensive  with  the 
whole  Union.  It  may  grant  to  all,  or  it  can  grant  to  none.  And  this 
comprehensive  equity  is  not  only  in  conformity  with  the  spirit  of  the  ces- 
sions in  the  deeds  from  the  ceding  States,  but  is  expressly  enjoined  by  the 
terms  of  those  deeds. 

Such  is  the  probable  origin  of  the  pretension  which  I  have  been  trac- 
ing; and  now  let  us  examine  its  nature  and  foundation.  The  argument  in 
behalf  of  the  new  States,  is  founded  on  the  notion,  that  as  the  old  States, 
upon  coming  out  of  the  revolutionary  war,  had  or  claimed,  a  right  to  all 
the  lands  within  their  respective  limits ;  and  as  the  new  States  have  been 
admitted  into  the  Union  on  the  same  footing  and  condition  in  all  respects 
with  the  old,  therefore  they  are  entitled  to  all  the  waste  lands  embraced 
within  their  boundaries.  But  the  argument  forgets  that  all  the  revolu- 
tionary States  had  not  waste  lands ;  that  some  had  but  very  little,  and 
others  none.  It  forgets  that  the  right  of  the  States  to  the  waste  lands 
within  their  limits  was  controverted ;  and  that  it  was  insisted  that,  as  they 
had  been  conquered  in  a  common  war,  waged  with  common  means,  and 
attended  with  general  sacrifices,  the  public  lands  should  be  held  for  the 
common  benefit  of  all  the  States.  It  forgets  that  in  consequence  of  this 
right,  asserted  in  behalf  of  the  whole  Union,  the  States  that  contained  any 
large  bodies  of  waste  lands  (and  Virginia,  particularly,  that  had  the  most) 
ceded  them  to  the  Union,  for  the  equal  benefit  of  all  the  States.  It  for- 
gets that  the  very  equality  which  is  the  basis  of  the  argument,  would  be 
totally  subverted  by  the  admission  of  the  validity  of  the  pretension.  For 
how  would  the  matter  then  stand  ?  The  revolutionary  States  will  have 
divested  themselves  of  the  large  districts  of  vacant  lands  which  they  con- 
tained, for  the  common  benefit  of  all  the  States ;  and  those  same  lands 
will  enure  to  the  benefit  of  the  new  States  exclusively.  There  will  be,  on 
the  supposition  of  the  validity  of  the  pretension,  a  reversal  of  the  condi- 
tion of  the  two  classes  of  States.  Instead  of  the  old  having,  as-  is  alleged, 
the  wild  lands  which  they  included  at  the  epoch  of  the  Revolution,  they 
will  have  none,  and  the  new  States  all.  And  this  in  the  name  and  for  the 
purpose  of  equality  among  all  the  members  of  the  confederacy !     What, 

32 


498  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY.        ' 

especially,  would  be  the  situation  of  Virginia  ?  She  magnanimously  ceded 
an  empire  in  extent  for  the  common  benefit.  And  now  it  is  proposed  not 
only  to  withdraw  that  empire  from  the  object  of  its  solemn  dictation,  to 
the  use  of  all  the  States,  but  to  deuy  her  any  participation  in  it,  and  ap- 
propriate it  exclusively  to  the  benefit  of  the  new  States  carved  out  of  it. 

If  the  new  States  had  any  right  to  the  public  lands,  in  order  to  produce 
the  very  equality  contended  for,  they  ought  forthwith  to  cede  that  right  to 
the  Union,  for  the  common  benefit  of  all  the  States.  Having  no  such  right, 
they  ought  to  acquiesce  cheerfully  in  an  equality  which  does,  in  fact,  now 
exist  between  them  and  the  old  States. 

The  committee  on  manufactures  has  clearly  shown,  that  if  the  right  were 
recognized  in  the  new  States  now  existing,  to  the  public  land  within  their 
limits,  each  of  the  new  States,  as  they  might  hereafter  be  successively  ad- 
mitted into  the  Union,  would  have  the  same  right ;  and,  consequently,  that 
the  pretension  under  examination  embraces,  in  effect,  the  whole  public 
domain,  that  is,  a  billion  and  eighty  millions  of  acres  of  land. 

The  right  of  the  Union  to  the  public  lands  is  incontestable.  It  ought 
not  to  be  considered  debatable.  It  never  was  questioned  but  by  a  few, 
whose  monstrous  heresy  it  was  probably  supposed,  would  escape  animad- 
version from  the  enormity  of  the  absurdity,  and  the  utter  impracticability  of 
the  success  of  the  claim.  The  right  of  the  whole  is  sealed  by  the  blood  of 
the  Revolution,  founded  upon  solemn  deeds  of  cession  from  sovereign 
States,  deliberately  executed  in  the  face  of  the  world,  or  resting  upon 
national  treaties  concluded  with  foreign  powers,  on  ample  equivalents 
contributed  from  the  common  treasury  of  the  people  of  the  United 
States. 

This  right  of  the  whole  was  stamped  upon  the  face  of  the  new  States  at 
the  very  instant  of  their  parturition.  They  admitted  and  recognized  it  with 
their  first  breath.  They  hold  their  stations,  as  members  of  the  confederacy, 
in  virtue  of  that  admission.  The  senators  who  sit  here,  and  the  members 
in  the  House  of  Representatives  from  the  new  States,  deliberate  in  Congress 
with  other  senators  and  representatives,  under  that  admission.  And  since 
the  new  States  came  into  being,  they  have  recognized  this  right  of  the 
general  government  by  innumerable  acts — 

By  their  concurrence  in  the  passage  of  hundreds  of  laws  respecting  the 
public  domain,  founded  upon  the  incontestable  right  of  the  whole  of  the 
States ; 

By  repeated  applications  to  extinguish  Indian  titles,  and  to  survey  the 
lands  which  they  covered ; 

And  by  solicitation  and  acceptance  of  extensive  grants  of  the  public  lands 
from  the  general  government. 

The  existence  of  the  new  State  is  a  falsehood,  or  the  right  of  all  the 
States  to  the  public  domain  is  an  undeniable  truth.  They  have  no  more 
right  to  the  public  lands,  within  their  particular  jurisdiction,  than  other 
States  have  to  the  mint,  the  forts  and  arsenals,  or  public  ships,  within  theirs, 


ON  THE  PUBLIC  LANDS.  499 

or  than  the  people  of  the  District  of  Columbia  have  to  this  magnificent 
capitol,  in  whose  splendid  halls  we  now  deliberate. 

The  equality  contended  for  between  all  the  States  now  exists.  The  pub- 
he  lands  are  now  held,  and  ought  to  be  held  and  administered  for  the  com- 
mon benefit  of  all.  I  hope  our  fellow-citizens  of  Illinois,  Indiana,  and  Mis- 
souri, will  reconsider  the  matter  ;  that  they  will  cease  to  take  counsel  from 
demagogues  who  would  deceive  them,  and  instill  erroneous  principles  into 
their  ears  ;  and  that  they  will  feel  and  acknowledge  that  their  brethren  of 
Kentucky  and  of  Ohio,  and  of  all  the  States  in  the  Union,  have  an  equal 
right  with  the  citizens  of  those  three  States,  in  the  public  lands.  If  the 
possibility  of  an  event  so  direful  as  a  severance  of  this  Union  were  for  a 
moment  contemplated,  what  would  be  the  probable  consequence  of  such 
an  unspeakable  calamity;  if  three  confederacies  were  formed  out  of  its 
fragments,  do  you  imagine  that  the  western  confederacy  would  consent  to 
have  the  States  including  the  public  lands  hold  them  exclusively  for  them- 
selves ?  Can  you  imagine  that  the  States  of  Ohio,  Kentucky,  and  Tennes- 
see, would  quietly  renounce  their  right  in  all  the  public  lands  west  of  them  ? 
No,  sir  !  No,  sir  !  They  would  wade  to  their  knees  in  blood,  before  they 
would  make  such  an  unjust  and  ignominious  surrender. 

But  this  pretension,  unjust  to  the  old  States,  unequal  as  to  all,  would  be 
injurious  to  the  new  States  themselves,  in  whose  behalf  it  has  been  put 
forth,  if  it  were  recognized.  The  interest  of  the  new  States  is  not  confined 
to  the  lands  within  their  limits,  but  extends  to  the  whole  billion  and  eighty 
millions  of  acres.  Sanction  the  claims,  however,  and  they  are  cut  down 
and  restricted  to  that  which  is  included  in  their  own  boundaries.  Is  it  not 
better  for  Ohio,  instead  of  the  five  millions  and  a  half,  or  Indiana,  instead 
of  the  fifteen  millions,  or  even  for  Illinois,  instead  of  the  thirty-one  or 
thirty-two  millions,  or  Missouri  instead  of  the  thirty-eight  millions,  within 
their  respective  limits,  to  retain  their  interest,  in  those  several  qualities, 
and  also  to  retain  their  interest  in  common  with  the  other  members  of  the 
Union,  in  the  countless  millions  of  acres  that  lie  west,  or  north-west, 
beyond  them  ? 

I  will  now  proceed,  Mr.  President,  to  consider  the  expediency  of  a  reduc- 
tion of  the  price  of  the  public  lands,  and  the  reasons  assigned  by  the  land 
committee,  in  their  report,  in  favor  of  that  measure.  They  are  presented 
there  in  formidable  detail,  and  spread  out  under  seven  different  heads.  Let 
us  examine  them  ;  the  first  is,  "  because  the  new  States  have  a  clear  right 
to  participate  in  the  benefits  of  a  reduction  of  the  revenue  to  the  wants  of 
the  government,  by  getting  the  reduction  extended  to  the  article  of  revenue 
chiefly  used  by  them."  Here  is  a  renewal  of  the  attempt  made  early  in 
the  session,  to  confound  the  public  lands  with  foreign  imports,  which  was 
so  successfully  exposed  and  refuted  by  the  report  of  the  committee  on  manu- 
factures. 

Will  not  the  new  States  participate  in  any  reduction  of  the  revenue,  in 
common  with  the  old  States,  without  touching  the  public  lands  ?     As  far 


500  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

as  they  are  consumers  of  objects  of  foreign  import,  will  they  not  equally 
share  the  benefit  with  the  old  States  ?     What  right,  over  and  above  that 
equal  participation,  have  the  new  States  to  a  reduction  of  the  price  of  the 
public  lands  ]     As  States,  what  right,  much  less  what  "  clear  right"  have 
they  to  any  such  reduction  ?     In  their  sovereign  or  corporate  capacities, 
what  right  ?    Have  not  all  the  stipulations  between  them,  as  States,  and  the 
general  government,  been  fully  complied  with  ?     Have  the  people  within 
the  new  States,  considered  distinct  from  the  States  themselves,  any  right 
to  such  a  reduction.     Whence  is  it  derived  ?     They  went  there  in  pursuit 
of  their  own  happiness.    They  bought  lands  from  the  public  because  it  was 
their  interest  to  make  the  purchase,  and  they  enjoy  them.     Did  they,  be- 
cause they  purchased  some  land,  which  they  possess  peaceably,  acquire  any, 
and  what  right  in  the  land  which  they  did  not  buy  ?     But  it  may  be  ar- 
gued that  by  settling  and  improving  these  lands  the  adjacent  public  lands 
are  enhanced.     True  ;  and  so  are  their  own.     The   enhancement  of  the 
public  lands  was  not  a  consequence  which  they  went  there  to  produce,  but 
was  a  collateral  effect,  as  to  which  they  were  passive.     The  public  does 
not  seek  to  avail  itself  of  this  augmentation  in  value  by  augmenting  the 
price.     It  leaves  that  where  it  was ;  and  the  demand  for  reduction  is  made 
in  behalf  of  those  who  say  their  labor  has  increased  the  value  of  the  public 
lands,  and   the  claim  to  reduction  is  founded  upon  the  fact  of  enhanced 
value.     The  public,   like  all  other  land-holders,  had  a  right  to  anticipate 
that  the  sale  of  a  part  would  communicate,  incidentally,  greater  value  upon 
the  residue.     And,  like  all  other  land  proprietors,  it  has  the  right  to  ask 
more  for  that  residue  ;  but  it  does  not,  and,  for  one,  I  should  be  as  unwill- 
ing to  disturb  the  existing  price  by  augmentation  as  by  reduction.     But 
the  public  lands  is  the  article  of  revenue  which  the  people  of  the  new 
States  chiefly  consume.     In  another  part  of  this  report,  liberal  grants  of 
the  public  lands  are  recommended,  and  the  idea  of  holding  the  public 
lands  as  a  source  of  revenue  is  scouted ;  because  it  is  said,  more  revenue 
could  be  collected  from   the  settlers,  as  consumers,  than  from  the  lands. 
Here  it  seems  that  the  public  lands  are  the  articles  of  revenue  chiefly  con- 
sumed by  the  new  States. 

With  respect  to  lands  yet  to  be  sold,  they  are  open  to  the  purchase 
alike  of  emigrants  from  the  old  States,  and  settlers  in  the  new.  As  the 
latter  have  most  generally  supplied  themselves  with  lands,  the  probabdity 
is,  that  the  emigrants  are  more  interested  in  the  question  of  reduction  than 
the  settlers.  At  all  events,  there  can  be  no  peculiar  right  to  such  a  re- 
duction existing  in  the  new  States.  It  is  a  question  common  to  all,  and 
to  be  decided  in  reference  to  the  interest  of  the  whole  Union. 

Second.  "  Because  the  public  debt  being  now  paid,  the  public  lands  are  en- 
tirely released  from  the  pledge  they  were  under  to  that  object,  and  are  free  to 
receive  a  new  and  liberal  destination,  for  the  relief  of  die  States  in  which  they  He." 

The  payment  of  the  publio  debt  is  conceded  to  be  near  at  hand ;  and  it 


ON  THE  PUBLIC  LANDS.  501 

is  admitted  that  the  public  lands,  being  liberated,  may  now  receive  a  new 
and  liberal  destination.  Such  an  appropriation  of  their  proceeds  is  pro- 
posed  by  the  bill  reported  by  the  committee  on  manufactures,  and  to  which 
I  shall  hereafter  more  particularly  call  the  attention  of  the  Senate.  But  it 
did  not  seem  just  to  that  committee,  that  this  new  and  liberal  destination 
of  them  should  be  restricted  "  for  the  relief  of  the  States  in  which  they  lie," 
exclusively,  but  should  extend  to  all  the  States  indiscriminately,  upon  prin- 
ciples of  equitable  distribution. 

Third.  "  Because  nearly  one  hundred  millions  of  acres  of  the  land  now  in 
market  are  the  refuse  of  sales  and  donations,  through  a  long  series  of  years,  and 
are  of  very  little  actual  value,  and  are  only  fit  to  be  given  to  settlers,  or  aban- 
doned to  the  States  in  which  they  lie." 

According  to  an  official  statement,  the  total  quantity  of  public  land 
which  has  been  surveyed  up  to  the  31st  of  December  last,  was  a  little  up- 
ward of  one  hundred  and  sixty-two  millions  of  acres.  Of  this,  a  large  pro- 
portion, perhaps  even  more  than  the  one  hundred  millions  of  acres  stated 
in  the  land  report,  has  been  a  long  time  in  market.  The  entire  quantity 
which  has  ever  been  sold  by  the  United  States,  up  to  the  same  day,  after 
deducting  lands  relinquished  and  lands  reverted  to  the  United  States,  ac- 
cording to  an  official  statement,  also,  is  twenty-five  million  two  hundred 
and  forty-two  thousand  five  hundred  and  ninety  acres.  Thus  after  the 
lapse  of  thirty-six  years,  during  which  the  present  land  system  has  been  in 
operation,  a  little  more  than  twenty-five  millions  of  acres  have  been  sold, 
not  averaging  a  million  per  annum,  and  upward  of  one  hundred  millions 
of  the  surveyed  lands  remain  to  be  sold.  The  argument  of  the  report  of 
the  land  committee  assumes,  that  "  nearly  one  hundred  millions  are  the 
refuse  of  sales  and  donations,"  are  of  very  little  actual  value,  and  only  fit  to 
be  given  to  settlers,  or  abandoned  to  the  States  in  which  they  lie. 

Mr.  President,  let  us  define  as  we  go — let  us  analyze.  What  do  the 
land  committee  mean  by  "  refuse  land  ?"  Do  they  mean  worthless,  in- 
ferior, rejected  land,  which  nobody  will  buy  at  the  present  government 
price  ?  Let  us  look  at  facts,  and  make  them  our  guide.  The  government 
is  constantly  pressed  by  the  new  States  to  bring  more  and  more  lands  into 
the  market ;  to  extinguish  more  Indian  titles ;  to  survey  more.  The  new 
States  themselves  are  probably  urged  to  operate  upon  the  general  govern- 
ment by  emigrants  and  settlers,  who  see  still  before  them,  in  their  progress 
west,  other  new  lands  which  they  desire.  The  general  government  yields 
to  the  solicitations.  It  throws  more  land  into  the  market,  and  it  is  an- 
nually and  daily  preparing  additional  surveys  of  fresh  lands.  It  has  thrown, 
and  is  preparing  to  throw,  open  to  purchasers  already  one  huudred  and 
sixty-two  millions  of  acres.  And  now,  because  the  capacity  to  purchase, 
in  its  nature  limited  by  the  growth  of  our  population,  is  totally  incom- 
petent to  absorb  this  immense  quantity,  the  government  is  called  upon,  by 
some  of  the  very  persons  who  urged  the  exhibition  of  this  vast  amount  to 


502  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

sale,  to  consider  all  that  remains  unsold  as  refuse  !  Twenty-five  millions 
in  thirty-six  years  only  are  sold,  and  all  the  rest  is  to  be  looked  upon  as 
refuse.  Is  this  right  ?  If  there  had  been  five  hundred  millions  in  market, 
there  probably  would  not  have  been  more  or  much  more  sold.  But  I  deny 
the  correctness  of  the  conclusion  that  it  is  worthless  because  not  sold.  It  is 
not  sold  because  there  were  not  people  to  buy  it.  You  must  have  gone  to 
other  countries,  to  other  worlds,  to  the  moon,  and  drawn  from  thence  peo- 
ple to  buy  the  prodigious  quantity  which  you  offered  to  sell. 

Refuse  land  !  A  purchaser  goes  to  a  district  of  country  and  buys  out 
of  a  township  a  section  which  strikes  his  fancy.  He  exhausts  his  money. 
Others  might  have  preferred  other  sections.  Other  sections  may  even  be 
better  than  his.  He  can  with  no  more  propriety  be  said  to  have  "  refused" 
or  rejected  all  the  other  sections,  than  a  man  who,  attracted  by  the  beauty, 
charms,  and  accomplishments  of  a  particular  lady,  marries  her,  can  be  said 
to  have  rejected  or  refused  all  the  rest  of  the  sex. 

Is  it  credible,  that  out  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  or  one  hundred  and  sixty 
millions  of  acres  of  land  in  a  valley  celebrated  for  its  fertility,  there  are  only 
about  twenty-five  millions  of  acres  of  good  land,  and  that  all  the  rest  is 
refuse  ?  Take  the  State  of  Illinois  as  an  example.  Of  all  the  States  in 
the  Union,  that  State  probably  contains  the  greatest  proportion  of  rich, 
fertile  lands ;  more  than  Ohio,  more  than  Indiana,  abounding  as  they  both 
do  in  fine  lands.  Of  the  thirty-three  millions  and  a  half  of  public  lands 
in  Illinois,  a  little  more  only  than  two  millions  have  been  sold.  Is  the 
residue  of  thirty-one  millions  all  refuse  land  ?  Who  that  is  acquainted  in 
the  West  can  assert  or  believe  it?  No,  sir;  there  is  no  such  thiDg.  The 
unsold  lands  are  unsold  because  of  the  reasons  already  assigned.  Doubt- 
less there  is  much  inferior  land  remaining,  but  a  vast  quantity  of  the  best 
of  lands  also.  For  its  timber,  soil,  water-power,  grazing,  minerals,  almost 
all  land  possesses  a  certain  value.  If  the  lands  unsold  are  refuse  and 
worthless  in  the  hands  of  the  general  government,  why  are  they  sought 
after  with  so  much  avidity  ?  If  in  our  hands  they  are  good  for  nothing, 
what  more  would  they  be  worth  in  the  hands  of  the  new  States  ?  "  Only 
fit  to  be  given  to  settlers  !"  What  settlers  would  thank  you  ?  what  settlers 
would  not  scorn  a  gift  of  refuse,  worthless  land  ?  If  you  mean  to  be  gen- 
erous, give  them  what  is  valuable ;  be  manly  in  your  generosity. 

But  let  us  examine  a  little  closer  this  idea  of  refuse  land.  If  there  be 
any  State  in  which  it  is  to  be  found  in  large  quantities,  that  State  would 
be  Ohio.  It  is  the  oldest  of  the  new  States.  There  the  public  lands  have 
remainded  louger  exposed  in  the  market.  But  there  we  find  only  five 
millions  and  a  half  to  be  sold.  And  I  hold  in  my  hand  an  account  of 
sales  in  the  Zanosville  district,  one  of  the  oldest  in  that  State,  made  during 
the  present  year.  It  is  in  a  paper,  entitled  the  Ohio  Republican,  pub- 
lished in  Zanesville,  the  26th  of  May,  1832.  The  article  is  headed 
"  refuse  land,"  aud  it  states :  "  It  has  suited  the  interest  of  some  to  rep- 
resent the  lands  of  the  United  States  which  have  remained  in  market  for 


ON  THE  PUBLIC  LANDS.  503 

many  years  as  mere  '  refuse,'  which  can  not  be  sold ;  and  to  urge  a  rapid 
reduction  of  price,  and  the  cession  of  the  residue,  in  a  short  period,  to  the 
States  in  which  they  are  situated.  It  is  strongly  urged  against  this  plan 
that  it  is  a  speculating  project,  which,  by  alienating  a  large  quantity  of 
land  from  the  United  States,  will  cause  a  great  increase  of  price  to  actual 
settlers  in  a  few  years ;  instead  of  their  being  able  forever,  as  it  may  be 
said  is  the  case  under  the  present  system  of  land  sales,  to  obtain  a  farm  at 
a  reasonable  price.  To  show  how  far  the  lands  unsold  are  from  being 
worthless,  we  copy  from  the  Gazette  the  following  statement  of  recent  sales 
in  the  Zanesville  district,  one  of  the  oldest  districts  in  the  West.  The 
sales  at  the  Zanesville  land-office,  since  the  commencement  of  the  present 
year,  have  been  as  follows:  January,  seven  thousand  one  hundred  and 
twenty  dollars  and  eighty  cents;  February,  eight  thousand  five  hundred 
and  forty-two  dollars  and  sixty-seven  cents;  March,  eleven  thousand  seven 
hundred  and  forty-four  dollars  and  seventy-five  cents ;  April,  nine  thousand 
two  hundred  and  nine  dollars  and  nineteen  cents;  and  since  the  first  of  the 
•present  month  about  nine  thousand  dollars'  worth  have  beeu  sold,  more 
than  half  of  which  was  in  forty  acre  lots."  And  there  can  not  be  a  doubt 
that  the  act,  passed  at  this  session,  authorizing  sales  of  forty  acres,  will, 
from  the  desire  to  make  additions  to  farms,  and  to  settle  young  members 
of  families,  increase  the  sales  very  much,  at  least  during  this  year. 

A  friend  of  mine  in  this  city  bought  in  Illinois  last  fall  about  two 
thousand  acres  of  this  refuse  land  at  the  minimum  price,  for  which  he  has 
lately  refused  six  dollars  per  acre.  An  officer  of  this  body,  now  in  my 
eye,  purchased  a  small  tract  of  this  same  refuse  land,  of  one  hundred  and 
sixty  acres,  at  second  or  third  hand,  entered  a  few  years  ago,  and  which  is 
now  estimated  at  one  thousand  nine  hundred  dollars.  It  is  a  business,  a 
very  profitable  business,  at  which  fortunes  are  made  in  the  new  States,  to 
purchase  these  refuse  lands,  and,  without  improving  them,  to  sell  them  at 
large  advances. 

Far  from  being  discouraged  by  the  fact  of  so  much  surveyed  public  land 
remaining  unsold,  we  should  rejoice  that  this  bountiful  resource,  possessed 
by  our  country,  remains  in  almost  undiminished  quantity,  notwithstanding 
so  many  new  and  flourishing  States  have  sprung  up  in  the  wilderness, 
and  so  many  thousands  of  families  have  been  accommodated.  It  might 
be  otherwise,  if  the  public  land  was  dealt  out  by  government  with  a 
sparing,  grudging,  griping  hand.  But  they  are  liberally  offered,  in  ex- 
haustless  quantities,  and  at  moderate  prices,  enriching  individuals,  and 
tending  to  the  rapid  improvement  of  the  country.  The  two  important 
facts  brought  forward  and  emphatically  dwelt  on  by  the  committee  of 
manufactures,  stand  in  their  full  force,  unaffected  by  any  thing  stated  in 
the  report  of  the  land  committee.  These  facts  must  carry  conviction  to 
every  unbiased  mind,  that  will  deliberately  consider  them.  The  first  is,  the 
rapid  increase  of  the  new  States,  far  outstripping  the  old,  averaging  annu- 
ally an  increase  of  eight  and  a  half  per  centum,  and  doubling,  of  course, 


504  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

in  twelve  years.  One  of  these  States,  Illinois,  full  of  refuse  land,  increasing 
at  the  rate  of  eighteen  and  a  half  per  centum  !  Would  this  astonishing 
growth  take  place  if  the  lands  were  too  high,  or  all  the  good  land  sold  ? 
The  other  fact  is,  the  vast  increase  in  the  annual  sales — in  1830,  rising  of 
three  millions.  Since  the  report  of  the  committee  on  manufacture?,  the 
returns  have  come  in  of  the  sales  of  last  year,  which  had  heen  estimated 
at  three  millions.  They  were,  in  fact,  three  million  five  hundred  and  sixty- 
six  thousand  one  hundred  and  twenty-seven  dollars  and  ninety-four  cents ! 
Their  progressive  increase  baffles  all  calculation.  Would  this  happen,  if 
the  price  were  too  high  ? 

It  is  argued,  that  the  value  of  different  townships  and  sections  is  va- 
rious ;  and  that  it  is,  therefore,  wrong  to  fix  the  same  price  for  all.  The 
variety  in  the  quality,  situation,  and  advantages,  of  different  tracts,  is  no 
doubt  great.  After  the  adoption  of  any  system  of  classification,  there 
would  still  remain  very  great  diversity  in  the  tracts  belonging  to  the  same 
class.  This  is  the  law  of  nature.  The  presumption  of  inferiority,  and  of 
refuse  land,  founded  upon  the  length  of  time  that  the  land  has  been  in- 
market,  is  denied,  for  reasons  already  stated.  The  offer,  at  public  auction, 
of  all  lands  to  the  highest  bidder,  previous  to  their  being  sold  at  private 
sale,  provides  in  some  degree  for  the  variety  in  the  value,  since  each  pur- 
chaser pushes  the  land  up  to  the  price,  which,  according  to  his  opinion,  it 
ought  to  command.  But  if  the  price  demanded  by  government  is  not  too 
high  for  the  good  land  (and  no  one  can  believe  it),  why  not  wait  until  that 
is  sold,  before  any  reduction  in  the  price  of  the  bad  ?  And  that  will  not 
be  sold  for  many  years  to  come.  It  Avould  be  quite  as  wrong  to  bring  the 
price  of  good  land  down  to  the  standard  of  the  bad,  as  it  is  alleged  to 
he,  to  carry  the  latter  up  to  that  of  the  former.  Until  the  good  land  is 
sold  there  will  be  no  purchasers  of  the  bad  ;  for,  as  has  been  stated  in  the 
report  of  the  committee  on  manufactures,  a  discreet  farmer  would  rather 
give  a  dollar  and  a  quarter  per  acre  for  first-rate  laud,  than  accept  refuse 
and  worthless  land  as  a  present. 

"  Fourth.  Because  the  speedy  extinction  of  the  federal  title  within  their 
limits  is  necessary  to  the  independence  of  the  new  States,  to  their  equality  with 
the  elder  States ;  to  the  development  of  their  resources ;  to  the  subjection  of 
their  soil  to  taxation,  cultivation,  and  settlement,  and  to  the  proper  enjoyment 
of  their  jurisdiction  and  sovereignty." 

All  this  is  mere  assertion  and  declamation.  The  general  government,  at 
a  moderate  price,  is  selling  the  public  land  as  fast  as  it  can  find  purchasers. 
The  new  States  are  populating  with  unexampled  rapidity  ;  their  condition 
is  now  much  more  eligible  than  that  of  some  of  the  old  States.  Ohio, 
I  am  sony  to  be  obliged  to  confess,  is,  in  internal  improvement  and  some 
other  respects,  fifty  years  in  advance  of  her  elder  sister  and  neighbor, 
Kentucky.  How  have  her  growth  and  prosperity,  her  independence,  her 
equality  with  the  elder  States,  the  development  of  her  resources,  the  tax- 


ON  THE  PUBLIC  LANDS.  505 

ation,  cultivation,  and  settlement  of  her  soil,  or  the  proper  enjoyment  of 
her  jurisdiction  and  sovereignty,  been  affected  or  impaired  by  the  federal 
title  within  her  limits?  The  federal  title!  It  has  been  a  source  of  bless- 
ings and  of  bounties,  but  not  one  of  real  grievance.  As  to  the  exemption 
from  taxation  of  the  public  lands,  and  the  exemption  for  five  years  of 
those  sold  to  individuals,  if  the  public  land  belonged  to  the  new  States, 
would  they  tax  it  ?  And  as  to  the  latter  exemption,  it  is  paid  for  by  the 
general  government,  as  may  be  seen  by  reference  to  the  compacts ;  and  it 
is,  moreover,  beneficial  to  the  new  States  themselves,  by  holding  out  a 
motive  to  emigrants  to  purchase  and  settle  within  their  limits. 

"  Sixth.  Because  the  ramified  machinery  of  the  land-office  department,  and 
the  ownership  of  so  much  soil,  extends  the  patronage  and  authority  of  the  gen- 
eral government  into  the  heart  and  corners  of  the  new  States,  and  subjects 
their  policy  to  the  danger  of  a  foreign  and  powerful  influence." 

A  foreign  and  powerful  influence  !  The  federal  government  a  foreign 
government !  And  the  exercise  of  a  legitimate  control  over  the  national 
property,  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole  people  of  the  United  States,  a  dep- 
recated penetration  into  the  heart  and  corners  of  the  new  States !  As  to 
the  calamity  of  the  land  offices,  which  are  held  within  them,  I  believe  that 
is  not  regarded  by  the  people  of  these  States  with  quite  as  much  horror 
as  it  is  by  the  land  committee.  They  justly  consider  that  they  ought  to 
hold  those  offices  themselves,  and  that  no  persons  ought  to  be  sent  from 
the  other  foreign  States  of  this  Union  to  fill  them.  And  if  the  number 
of  the  offices  were  increased,  it  would  not  be  looked  upon  by  them  as  a 
grievous  addition  to  the  calamity. 

But  what  do  the  land  committee  mean  by  the  authority  of  this  foreign, 
federal  government  ?  Surely,  they  do  not  desire  to  get  rid  of  the  federal 
government.  And  yet  the  final  settlement  of  the  land  question  will  have 
effected  but  little  in  expelling  its  authority  from  the  bosoms  of  the  new 
States.  Its  action  will  still  remain  in  a  thousand  forms,  and  the  heart  and 
corners  of  the  new  States  will  still  be  invaded  by  post-offices,  and  post- 
masters and  post-roads,  and  the  Cumberland  road,  and  various  other 
modifications  of  its  power. 

"  Because  the  sum  of  four  hundred  and  twenty-five  millions  of  dollars,  pro- 
posed to  be  drawn  from  the  new  States  and  Territories,  by  the  sale  of  their  soil, 
at  one  dollar  and  twenty-five  cents  per  acre,  is  unconscionable  and  impracticable 
— such  as  never  can  be  paid — and  the  bare  attempt  tr  raise  which,  must  drain, 
exhaust,  and  impoverish  these  States,  and  give  birth  to  the  feelings,  which  a 
sense  of  injustice  and  oppression  never  fail  to  excite,  and  the  excitement  of 
which  should  be  so  carefully  avoided  in  a  confederacy  of  free  States." 

In  another  part  of  this  report  the  committee  say,  speaking  of  the  im- 
mense revenue  alleged  to  be  derivable  from  the  public  lands,  "  this  ideal 
revenue  is  estimated  at  four  hundred  and  twenty-five  millions  of  dollars, 


50G  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY   CLAY. 

for  the  lands  now  within  the  limits  of  the  States  and  Territories,  and  at 
one  billion  three  hundred  and  sixty-three  million  five  hundred  and  eighty- 
nine  thousand  six  hundred  and  ninety-one  dollars  for  the  whole  federal 
domain.  Such  chimerical  calculations  preclude  the  propriety  of  argu- 
mentative answers."  Well,  if  these  calculations  are  all  chimerical,  there 
is  no  dangei*,  from  the  preservation  of  the  existing  land  system,  of  drain- 
ing, exhausting  and  impoverishing  the  new  States,  and  of  exciting  them  to 
rebellion. 

The  manufacturing  committee  did  not  state  what  the  public  lands  would, 
in  fact,  produce.  They  could  not  state  it.  It  is  hardly  a  subject  of  ap- 
proximate estimate.  The  committee  stated  what  would  be  the  proceeds, 
estimated  by  the  minimum  price  of  the  public  lands ;  what,  at  one  half  of 
that  price;  and  added,  that,  although  there  might  be  much  land  that 
would  never  sell  at  one  dollar  and  a  quarter  per  acre,  "  as  fresh  lands  are 
brought  into  market  and  exposed  to  sale  at  auction,  many  of  them  sell  at 
prices  exceeding  one  dollar  and  a  quarter  per  acre."  They  concluded  by 
remarking,  that  the  least  favorable  view  of  regarding  them,  was  to  con- 
sider them  a  capital  yielding  an  annuity  of  three  millions  of  dollars  at 
this  time ;  that,  in  a  few  years,  that  annuity  would  probably  be  doubled, 
and  that  the  capital  might  then  be  assumed  as  equal  to  one  hundred  mil- 
lions of  dollars. 

Whatever  may  be  the  sum  drawn  from  the  sales  of  the  public  lands,  it 
will  be  contributed,  not  by  citizens  of  the  States  alone  in  which  they  are 
situated,  but  by  emigrants  from  all  the  States.  And  it  will  be  raised,  not 
in  a  single  year,  but  in  a  long  series  of  years.  It  would  have  been 
impossible  for  the  State  of  Ohio  to  have  paid,  in  one  year,  the  millions 
that  have  been  raised  in  that  State,  by  the  sale  of  public  lands ;  but  in 
a  period  of  upward  of  thirty  years,  the  payment  has  been  made,  not  only 
without  impoverishing,  but  with  the  constantly-increasing  prosperity  of  the 
State. 

Such,  Mr.  President,  are  the  reasons  of  the  land  committee,  for  the  re- 
duction of  the  price  of  the  public  lands.  Some  of  them  had  been  antici- 
pated and  refuted  in  the  report  of  the  manufacturing  committee ;  and  I 
hope  that  I  have  now  shown  the  insolidity  of  the  residue. 

I  will  not  dwell  upon  the  consideration  urged  in  that  report,  against  any 
large  reduction,  founded  upon  its  inevitable  tendency  to  lessen  the  value 
of  the  landed  property  throughout  the  Union,  and  that  in  the  western 
States  especially.  That  such  would  be  the  necessary  consequence,  no  man 
can  doubt,  who  will  seriously  reflect  upon  such  a  measure  as  that  of  throw- 
ing into  market,  immediately,  upward  of  one  hundred  and  thirty  millions 
of  acres,  and  at  no  distant  period  upward  of  two  hundred  millions  more, 
at  greatly  reduced  rates. 

If  the  honorable  chairman  of  the  land  committee  (Mr.  King),  had  relied 
upon  his  own  sound  practical  sense,  he  would  have  presented  a  report  far 
less  objectionable  than  that  which  he  has  made.     He  has  availed  himself 


ON  THE  PUBLIC  LANDS.  507 

of  another's  aid,  and  the  hand  of  the  senator  from  Missouri  (Mr.  Benton), 
is  as  visible  in  the  composition,  as  if  his  name  had  been  subscribed  to  the 
instrument.  We  hear  again,  in  this  paper,  of  that  which  we  have  so  often 
heard  repeated  before  in  debate,  by  the  senator  from  Missouri — the  senti- 
ments of  Edmund  Burke.  And  what  was  the  state  of  things  in  England, 
to  which  those  sentiments  were  applied  ? 

England  has  too  little  land,  and  too  many  people.  America  has  too 
much  land  for  the  present  population  of  the  country,  and  wants  people. 
The  British  crown  had  owned,  for  many  generations,  large  bodies  of  land, 
preserved  for  game  and  forest,  from  which  but  small  revenues  were  derived. 
It  was  proposed  to  sell  out  the  crown  lands,  that  they  might  be  peopled  and 
cultivated,  and  that  the  royal  family  should  be  put  on  the  civil  list.  Mr. 
Burke  supported  the  proposition  by  convincing  arguments.  But  what 
analogy  is  there  between  the  crown  lands  of  the  British  sovereign,  and  the 
public  lands  of  the  United  States  ?  Are  they  here  locked  tip  from  the 
people,  and,  for  the  sake  of  their  game  or  timber,  excluded  from  sale  ? 
Are  not  they  freely  exposed  in  market,  to  all  who  want  them,  at  moderate 
prices  ?  The  complaint  is,  that  they  are  not  sold  fast  enough,  iu  other 
words,  that  people  are  not  multiplied  rapidly  enough  to  buy  them.  Pa- 
tience, gentlemen  of  the  land  committee,  patience  !  The  new  States  are 
daily  rising  in  power  and  importance.  Some  of  them  a>e  already  great 
and  flourishing  members  of  the  confederacy.  And,  if  you  will  only  ac- 
quiesce in  the  certain  and  quiet  operation  of  the  laws  of  God  and  man, 
the  wilderness  will  quickly  teem  with  people,  and  be  filled  with  the  monu- 
ments of  civilization. 

The  report  of  the  land  committee  proceeds  to  notice  and  to  animadvert 
upon  certain  opinions  of  a  late  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  contained  in  his 
annual  report,  and  endeavors  to  connect  them  with  some  sentiments  ex- 
pressed in  the  report  of  the  committee  on  manufactures.  That  report  has 
before  been  the  subject  of  repeated  commentary  in  the  Senate,  by  the 
senator  from  Missouri,  and  of  much  misrepresentation  and  vituperation  in 
the  public  press.  Mr.  Rush  showed  me  the  rough  draft  of  that  report,  and 
I  advised  him  to  expunge  the  paragraphs  in  question,  because  I  foresaw  that 
they  would  be  misrepresented,  and  that  he  would  be  exposed  to  unjust  ac- 
cusation. But  knowing  the  purity  of  his  intentions,  believing  in  the 
soundness  of  the  views  which  he  presented,  and  confiding  in  the  candor 
of  a  just  public,  he  resolved  to  retain  the  paragraphs.  I  can  not  suppose 
the  senator  from  Missouri  ignorant  of  what  passed  between  Mr.  Rush  and 
me,  and  of  his  having,  against  my  suggestions,  retained  the  paragraphs  in 
question,  because  these  facts  were  all  stated  by  Mr.  Rush  himself,  in  a  let- 
ter addressed  to  a  late  member  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  represent- 
ing the  district  in  which  I  reside,  which  letter,  more  than  a  year  ago,  was 
published  in  the  western  papers. 

I  shall  say  nothing  in  defense  of  myself,  nothing  to  disprove  the  charo-e 
of  my  cherishing  unfriendly  feelings  and  sentiments  toward  any  part  of  the 


508  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

West.  If  the  public  acts  in  which  I  have  participated,  if  the  uniform  tenor 
of  my  whole  life,  will  not  refute  such  an  imputation,  nothing  that  I  could 
here  say  would  refute  it. 

But  I  will  say  something  in  defense  of  the  opinions  of  my  late  patriotic 
and  enlightened  colleague,  not  here  to  speak  for  himself;  and  I  will  vindi- 
cate his  official  opinions  from  the  erroneous  glosses  and  interpretations 
which  have  been  put  upon  them. 

Mr.  Rush,  in  an  official  report  which  will  long  remain  a  monument  of 
his  ability,  was  surveying,  with  a  statesman's  eye,  the  condition  of  America. 
He  was  arguing  in  favor  of  the  protective  policy — the  American  system. 
He  spoke  of  the  limited  vocations  of  our  society,  and  the  expediency  of 
multiplying  the  means  of  increasing  subsistence,  comfort,  and  wealth.  He 
noticed  the  great  and  the  constant  tendency  of  our  fellow-citizens  to  the 
cultivation  of  the  soil,  the  want  of  a  market  for  their  surplus  produce^ 
the  inexpediency  of  all  blindly  rushing  to  the  same  universal  employ- 
ment, and  the  policy  of  dividing  ourselves  into  various  pursuits.     He  says: 

"  The  manner  in  which  the  remote  lands  of  the  United  States  are  selling  and 
settling,  while  it  possibly  may  tend  to  increase  more  quickly  the  aggregate  popu- 
lation of  the  country,  and  the  mere  means  of  subsistence,  does  not  increase 
capital  in  the  same  proportion.  *  *  *  Any  thing  that  may  serve  to  hold 
back  this  tendency  to  diffusion  from  running  too  far  and  too  long  into  an  ex- 
treme, can  scarcely  prove  otherwise  than  salutary.  *  *  *  If  the  population 
of  these  (a  majority  of  the  States,  including  some  western  States),  not  yet  re- 
dundant in  fact,  though  appearing  to  be  so,  under  this  legislative  incitement  to 
emigrate,  remain  fixed  in  more  instances,  as  it  probably  would  be  by  extending  the 
motives  to  manufacturing  labor,  it  is  believed  that  the  nation  would  gain  in  two 
ways:  first,  by  the  more  rapid  accumulation  of  capital,  and  next,  by  the  general 
reduction  of  the  excess  of  its  agricultural  population  over  that  engaged  in  other 
vocations.  It  is  not  imagined  that  it  ever  would  be  practicable,  even  if  it  were 
desirable,  to  turn  this  stream  of  emigration  aside ;  but  resources,  opened  through 
the  influence  of  the  laws,  in  new  fields  of  industry,  to  the  inhabitants  of  the 
States  already  sufficiently  peopled  to  enter  upon  them,  might  operate  to  lessen, 
in  some  degree,  and  usefully  lessen,  its  absorbing  force." 

Now,  Mr.  President,  what  is  there  in  this  view  adverse  to  the  West,  or 
unfavorable  to  its  interests  ?  Mr.  Rush  is  arguing  on  the  tendency  of  the 
people  to  engage  in  agriculture,  and  the  incitement  to  emigrate,  produced 
by  our  laws.  Does  he  propose  to  change  those  laws  in  that  particular  ? 
Does  he  propose  any  new  measure  ?  So  far  from  suggesting  any  altera- 
tion of  the  conditions  on  which  the  public  lands  are  sold,  he  expressly 
says,  that  it  is  not  desirable,  if  it  were  practicable,  to  turn  this  stream  of 
emigration  aside.  Leaving  all  the  laws  in  full  force,  and  all  the  motives  to 
emigrate  arising  from  fertile  and  cheap  lands,  untouched,  he  recommends 
the  encouragement  of  a  new  branch  of  business,  in  which  all  the  Union, 
the  West  as  well  as  the  rest,  is  interested,  thus  presenting  an  option  to 
population  to  engage  in  manufactures  or  in  agriculture,  at  its  own  discre- 


ON    THE    PUBLIC    LANDS.  509 

tioTi.  And  does  such  an  option  afford  just  ground  of  complaint  to  any- 
one ?  Is  it  not  an  advantage  to  all  ?  Do  the  land  committee  desire  (I 
am  sure  they  do  not)  to  create  starvation  in  one  part  of  the  Union,  that 
emigrants  may  be  forced  into  another  ?  If  they  do  not,  they  ought  not  to 
condemn  a  multiplication  of  human  employments,  by  which,  as  its  certain 
consequence,  there  will  be  an  increase  in  the  means  of  subsistence  and 
comfort.  The  objection  to  Mr.  Rush,  then,  is,  that  he  looked  at  his  whole 
country,  and  at  all  parts  of  it;  and  that  while  he  desired  the  prosperity 
and  growth  of  the  West  to  advance  undisturbed,  he  wished  to  build  up, 
on  deep  foundations,  the  welfare  of  all  the  people. 

Mr.  Rush  knew  that  there  were  thousands  of  the  poorer  classes  who 
never  would  emigrate ;  and  that  emigration,  under  the  best  auspices,  was 
far  from  being  unattended  with  evil.  There  are  moral,  physical,  pecuniary 
obstacles  to  all  emigration  ;  and  these  will  increase,  as  the  good  vacant 
lands  of  the  West  are  removed,  by  intervening  settlements  further  and 
further  from  society,  as  it  is  now  located.  It  is,  I  believe,  Dr.  Johnson 
who  pronounces,  that  of  all  vegetable  and  animal  creation,  man  is  the  most 
difficult  to  be  uprooted  and  transferred  to  a  distant  country ;  and  he  was 
right.  Space  itself,  mountains,  and  seas,  and  rivers,  are  impediments. 
The  want  of  pecuniary  means,  the  expenses  of  the  outfit,  subsistence  and 
transportation  of  a  family,  is  no  slight  circumstance.  When  all  these  diffi- 
culties are  overcome  (and  how  few,  comparatively,  can  surmount  them  !) 
the  greatest  of  all  remains — that  of  being  torn  from  one's  natal  spot — 
separated,  forever,  from  the  roof  under  which  the  companions  of  his 
childhood  were  sheltered,  from  the  trees  which  have  shaded  him  from 
summer's  heats,  the  spring  from  whose  gushing  fountain  he  has'drunk 
in  his  youth,  the  tombs  that  hold  the  precious  relics  of  his  venerated  an- 
cestors ! 

But  I  have  said,  that  the  laud  committee  had  attempted  to  confound  the 
sentiments  of  Mr.  Rush  with  some  of  the  reasoning  employed  by  the  com- 
mittee on  manufactures  against  the  proposed  reduction  of  the  price  of  the 
public  lands.  What  is  that  reasoning?  Here  it  is;  it  will  speak  for 
itself;  and  without  a  single  comment  will  demonstrate  how  different  it  is 
from  that  of  the  late  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  unexceptionable  as  that 
has  been  shown  to  be. 

"  The  greatest  emigration  (says  the  manufacturing  committee)  that  is  believed 
now  to  take  place  from  any  of  the  States,  is  from  Ohio,  Kentucky,  and  Tennes- 
see. The  effect  of  a  material  reduction  in  the  price  of  the  public  lands,  would 
be,  first  to  lessen  the  value  of  real  estate  in  those  three  States ;  secondly  to  di- 
minish their  interest  in  the  public  domain,  as  a  common  fund  for  the  benefit  of 
all  the  States ;  and,  thirdly,  to  offer  what  would  operate  as  a  bounty  to  further 
emigation  from  those  States,  occasioning  more  and  more  lands,  situated  within 
them,  to  be  thrown  into  the  market,  thereby  not  only  lessening  the  value  of 
their  lands,  but  draining  them,  both  of  their  population  and  labor." 

There  are  good  men  in  different  parts,  but  especially  in  the  Atlantic  por- 


510  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

tion,  of  the  Union,  who  have  been  induced  to  regard  lightly  this  vast  national 
property  ;  who  have  been  persuaded  that  the  people  of  the  West  are  dissat- 
isfied with  the  administration  of  it;  and  who  believe  that  it  will,  in  the 
end,  be  lost  to  the  nation,  and  that  it  is  not  worth  present  care  and  preser- 
vation. But  these  are  radical  mistakes.  The  great  body  of  the  West  are 
satisfied,  perfectly  satisfied,  with  the  general  administration  of  the  public 
lands.  They  would  indeed  like,  and  are  entitled  to,  a  more  liberal  ex- 
penditure among  thein  of  the  proceeds  of  the  sales.  For  this,  provision  is 
made  by  the  bill  to  which  I  will  hereafter  call  the  attention  of  the  Senate. 
But  the  great  body  of  the  West  have  not  called  for,  and  understand  too 
well  their  real  interest  to  desire,  any  essential  change  in  the  system  of  sur- 
vey, sale,  or  price  of  the  lands.  There  may  be  a  few,  stimulated  by 
demagogues,  who  desire  change  ;  and  what  system  is  there,  what  govern- 
ment, what  order  of  human  society,  in  which  a  few  do  not  desire  change  ? 

It  is  one  of  the  admirable  properties  of  the  existing  system,  that  it  con- 
tains within  itself,  and  carries  along,  principles  of  conservation  and  safety. 
In  the  progress  of  its  operation,  new  States  become  identified  with  the  old, 
in  feeling,  in  thinking,  and  in  interest.  Now,  Ohio  is  as  sound  as  any  old 
State  in  the  Union,  in  all  her  views  relating  to  the  public  lands.  She  feels 
that  her  share  in  the  exterior  domain  is  much  more  important  than  would 
be  an  exclusive  right  to  the  few  millions  of  acres  left  unsold,  within  her 
limits,  accompanied  by  a  virtual  surrender  of  her  interest  in  all  the  other 
public  lands  of  the  United  Stales.  And  I  have  no  doubt,  that  now,  the 
people  of  the  other  new  States,  left  to  their  own  unbiased  sense  of  equity 
and  justice,  would  form  the  same  judgment.  They  can  not  believe  that 
what  they  have  not  bought,  what,  remains  the  property  of  themselves  and 
all  their  brethren  of  the  United  Stales,  in  common,  belongs  to  them  exclu- 
sively. But  if  I  am  mistaken,  if  they  have  been  deceived  by  erroneous 
impressions  on  their  mind,  made  by  artful  men,  as  the  sales  proceed,  and 
the  land  is  exhausted,  and  their  population  increased,  like  the  State  of  Ohio, 
they  will  feel  that  their  true  interest  points  to  their  remaining  copartners 
in  the  whole  national  domain,  instead  of  bringing  forward  an  unfounded 
pretension  to  the  inconsiderable  remnant  which  will  be  then  left  in  their 
own  limits. 

And  now,  Mr.  President,  I  have  to  say  something  in  respect  to  the  par- 
ticular plan  brought  forward  by  the  committee  on  manufactures,  for  a  tem- 
porary appropriation  of  the  proceeds  of  the  sales  of  the  public  lands. 

The  committee  say  that  this  fund  is  not  wanted  by  the  general  govern- 
ment, ;  that  the  peace  of  the  country  is  not  likely,  from  present  appear* 
ances,  to  be  speedily  disturbed ;  and  that  the  general  government  is 
absolutely  embarrassed  in  providing  against  an  enormous  surplus  in  the 
treasury.  While  this  is  the  condition  of  the  federal  government,  the  States 
are  in  want  of,  and  can  most  beneficially  use,  that  very  surplus  with  which 
we  do  not  know  what  to  do.  The  powers  of  the  general  government  are 
limited  ;  those  of  the  States  are  ample.     If  those  limited  powers  authorized 


ON  THE  PUBLIC  LANDS.  511 

an  application  of  the  fund  to  some  objects,  perhaps  there  are  some  others, 
of  more  importance,  to  which  the  powers  of  the  States  would  be  more 
competent,  or  to  which  they  may  apply  a  more  provident  care. 

But  the  government  of  the  whole  and  of  the  parts,  at  last  is  but  one 
government  of  the  same  people.  In  form  they  are  two,  in  substance  one. 
They  both  stand  under  the  same  solemn  obligation  to  promote,  by  all  the 
powers  with  which  they  are  respectively  intrusted,  the  happiness  of  the 
people  ;  and  the  people,  in  their  turn,  owe  respect  and  allegiance  to  both. 
Maintaining:  these  relations,  there  should  be  mutual  assistance  to  each  other 
afforded  by  these  two  systems.  When  the  States  are  full-handed,  and  the 
coffers  of  the  general  government  are  empty,  the  States  should  come  to 
the  relief  of  the  general  government,  as  many  of  them  did,  most  promptly 
and  patriotically,  during  the  late  war.  When  the  conditions  of  the  par- 
ties are  reversed,  as  is  now  the  case,  the  States  wanting  what  is  almost  a 
burden  to  the  general  government,  the  duty  of  this  government  is  to  go  to 
the  relief  of  the  States. 

They  were  views  like  these  which  induced  a  majority  of  the  committee 
to  propose  the  plan  of  distribution,  contained  in  the  bill  now  under  consid- 
eration. For  one,  however,  I  will  again  repeat  the  declaration,  which  I 
made  early  in  the  session,  that  I  unite  cordially  with  those  who  condemn 
the  application  of  any  principle  of  distribution  among  the  several  States, 
to  surplus  revenue  derived  from  taxation.  I  think  income  derived  from 
taxation  stands  upon  ground  totally  distinct  from  that  which  is  received 
from  the  public  lands.  Congress  can  prevent  the  accumulation,  at  least 
for  any  considerable  time,  of  revenue  from  duties,  by  suitable  legislation, 
lowering  or  augmenting  the  imposts ;  but  it  can  not  stop  the  sales  of  the 
public  lauds,  without  the  exercise  of  arbitrary  and  intolerable  power.  The 
powers  of  Congress  over  the  public  lands  are  broader  and  more  compre- 
hensive, than  those  which  they  possess  over  taxatien,  and  the  money  pro- 
duced by  it. 

This  brings  me  to  consider,  first,  the  power  of  Congress  to  make  the 
distribution.  By  the  second  part  of  the  third  section  of  the  fourth  article 
of  the  Constitution,  Congress  "  have  power  to  dispose  of  and  make  all  need- 
ful rules  and  regulations  respecting  the  territory  or  other  property  of  the 
United  States."  The  power  of  disposition  is  plenary,  unrestrained,  un- 
qualified. It  is  not  limited  to  a  specified  object  or  to  a  defined  purpose, 
but  left  applicable  to  any  object  or  purpose  which  the  wisdom  of  Con- 
gress shall  deem  fit,  acting  under  its  high  responsibility. 

The  government  purchased  Louisiana  and  Florida.  May  it  not  apply 
the  proceeds  of  lands  within  those  countries,  to  any  object  which  the  good 
of  the  Union  may  seem  to  indicate  ?  If  there  be  a  restraint  in  the  Consti- 
tution, where  is  it,  what  is  it  ? 

The  uniform  practice  of  the  government  has  conformed  to  the  idea  of 
its  possessing  full  powers  over  the  public  lands.  They  have  been  freely 
granted,  from  time  to  time,  to  communities  and  individuals,  for  a  great 


512  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

variety  of  purposes.  To  States  for  education,  internal  improvements,  pub- 
lic buildings;  to  corporations  for  education  ;  to  the  deaf  and  dumb  ;  to  tbe 
cultivators  of  tbe  olive  and  tbe  vine  ;  to  pre-emptioners  ;  to  General  Lafay- 
ette, and  so  fortb. 

The  deeds  from  tbe  ceding  States,  far  from  opposing,  fully  warrant  tbe 
distribution.  That  of  Virginia  ceded  tbe  land  as  "a  common  fund  for  tbe 
use  and  benefit  of  such  of  tbe  United  States  as  have  become,  or  shall  be- 
come members  of  the  confederation  or  federal  alliance  of  the  said  States, 
Virginia  inclusive."  The  cession  was  for  the  benefit  of  all  tbe  States.  It 
may  be  argued  that  the  fund  must  be  retained  in  the  common  treasury, 
and  thence  paid  out.  But,  by  the  bill  reported,  it  will  come  into  the  com- 
mon treasury,  and  then  the  question,  how  it  shall  be  subsequently  applied 
for  the  use  and  benefit  of  such  of  the  United  States  as  compose  the  con- 
federacy, is  one  of  modus  only.  Whether  the  money  is  disbursed  by  tbe 
general  government  directly,  or  is  paid  out  upon  some  equal  and  just  prin- 
ciple, to  the  States,  to  be  disbursed  by  them,  can  not  affect  the  right  of 
distribution.  If  the  general  government  retained  the  power  of  ultimate 
disbursement,  it  could  execute  it  only  by  suitable  agents ;  and  what  agency 
is  more  suitable  than  that  of  the  States  themselves  ?  If  the  States  expend 
the  money,  as  the  bill  contemplates,  tbe  expenditnre  will,  in  effect,  be  a  dis- 
bursement for  the  benefit  of  tbe  whole,  although  the  several  States  are 
organs  of  the  expenditure  ;  for  tbe  whole  and  all  the  parts  are  identical. 
And  whatever  redounds  to  the  benefit  of  all  tbe  parts,  necessarily  con- 
tributes, iu  tbe  same  measure,  to  tbe  benefit  of  the  whole.  The  great 
question  should  be,  is  the  distribution  upon  equal  and  just  principles  ?  And 
this  brino-s  me  to  consider, 

Secondly,  tbe  terms  of  the  distribution  proposed  by  the  bill  of  tbe  com- 
mittee on  manufactures.  The  bill  proposes  a  division  of  the  net  proceeds 
of  the  sales  of  the  public  lands,  among  the  several  States  composing  the 
Union,  according  to  their  federal  representative  population,  as  ascertained 
by  the  last  census ;  and  it  provides  for  new  States  that  may  hereafter  be 
admitted  into  the  Union.  The  basis  of  tbe  distribution,  therefore,  is 
derived  from  the  Constitution  itself,  which  has  adopted  the  same  rule,  in 
respect  to  representation  and  direct  taxes.  None  could  be  more  just  and 
equitable. 

But  it  has  been  contended,  in  tbe  land  report,  that  the  revolutionary 
States  which  did  not  cede  their  public  lands  ought  not  to  be  allowed  to 
come  into  the  distribution.  This  objection  does  not  apply  to  tbe  purchases 
of  Louisiana  and  Florida,  because  the  consideration  for  them  was  paid  out 
of  the  common  treasury,  and  was  consequently  contributed  by  all  the 
States.  Nor  has  the  objection  any  just  foundation,  when  applied  to  the 
public  lands  derived  from  Virginia,  and  the  other  ceding  States;  because, 
by  tbe  terms  of  the  deeds,  the  cessions  were  made  for  the  use  and  benefit 
of  all  the  States.  The  ceding  States  having  made  no  exception  of  any 
State,  what  right  has  the  general  government  to  interpolate  in  the  deeds, 


ON   THE   PUBLIC   LANDS.  513 

and  now  create  an  exception  ?  The  general  government  is  a  mere  trustee, 
holding  the  domain  in  virtue  of  those  deeds,  according  to  the  terms  and 
conditions  which  they  expressly  describe  ;  and  it  is  bound  to  execute  the 
trust  accordingly.  But  how  is  the  fund  produced  by  the  public  lands  now 
expended  ?  It  comes  into  the  common  treasury,  and  is  disbursed  for  the 
common  benefit,  without  exception  of  any  State.  The  bill  only  proposes  to 
substitute  to  that  object,  now  no  longer  necessary,  another  and  more  useful 
common  object.  The  general  application  of  the  fund  will  continue,  under 
the  operation  of  the  bill,  although  the  particular  purposes  may  be  varied. 

The  equity  of  the  proposed  distribution,  as  it  respects  the  two  classes  of 
States,  the  old  and  the  new,  must  be  manifest  to  the  Senate.  It  proposes 
to  assign  to  the  new  States,  besides  the  five  per  centum  stipulated  for  in 
their  several  compacts  with  the  general  government,  the  further  sum  of  ten 
per  centum  upon  the  net  proceeds.  Assuming  the  proceeds  of  the  last 
year,  amounting  to  three  millions  five  hundred  and  sixty-six  thousand  one 
hundred  and  twenty-seven  dollars  and  ninety-four  cents,  as  the  basis  of  the 
calculation,  I  hold  in  my  hand  a  paper  which  shows  the  sum  that  each  of 
the  seven  new  States  would  receive.  They  have  complained  of  the  exemp- 
tion from  taxation  of  the  public  lands  sold  by  the  general  government  for 
five  years  after  the  sale.  If  that  exemption  did  not  exist,  and  they  were  to 
exercise  the  power  of  taxing  those  lands,  as  the  average  increase  of  their 
population  is  only  eight  and  a  half  per  centum  per  annum,  the  additional 
revenue  which  they  would  raise,  would  be  only  eight  and  a  half  per  centum 
per  annum  ;  that  is  to  say,  a  State  now  collecting  a  revenue  of  one  hundred 
thousand  dollars  per  annum,  would  collect  only  one  hundred  and  eight 
thousand  five  hundred,  if  it  were  to  tax  the  lands  recently  sold.  But  by  the 
bill  under  consideration,  each  of  the  seven  new  States  will  annually  receive, 
as  its  distributive  share,  more  than  the  whole  amount  of  its  annual  revenue. 

It  may  be  thought,  that  to  set  apart  ten  per  centum  to  the  new  States, 
in  the  first  instance,  is  too  great  a  proportion,  and  is  unjust  toward  the  old 
States.  But  it  will  be  recollected  that,  as  they  populate  much  faster  than 
the  old  States,  and  as  the  last  census  is  to  govern  in  the  apportionment,  they 
ought  to  receive  more  than  the  old  States.  If  they  receive  too  much  at 
the  commencement  of  the  term,  it  may  be  neutralized  by  the  end  of  it. 

After  the  deduction  shall  have  been  made  of  the  fifteen  per  centum  al- 
lotted to  the- new  States,  the  residue  is  to  be  divided  among  the  twenty- 
four  States,  old  and  new,  composing  the  Union.  What  each  of  the  States 
would  receive  is  shown  by  a  table  annexed  to  the  report.  Taking  the 
proceeds  of  the  last  year  as  the  standard,  there  must  be  added  one  sixth  to 
what  is  set  down  in  that  table  as  the  proportion  of  the  several  States. 

If  the  power  and  the  principle  of  the  proposed  distribution  be  satisfac- 
tory to  the  Senate,  I  think  the  objects  can  not  fail  to  be  equally  so.  They 
are  education,  internal  improvements,  and  colonization,  all  great  and  be- 
neficent objects,  all  national  in  their  nature.  No  mind  can  be  cultivated 
and  improved ;  no  work  of  internal  improvement  can  be  executed  in  any 

33 


514  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY    CLAY. 

part  of  the  Union,  nor  any  person  of  color  transported  from  any  of  its  ports, 
in  which  the  whole  Union  is  not  interested.  The  prosperity  of  the  whole 
is  an  aggregate  of  the  prosperity  of  the  parts. 

The  States,  each  judging  for  itself,  will  select  among  the  objects  enumer- 
ated in  the  bill,  that  which  comports  best  with  its  own  policy.  There  is 
no  compulsion  in  the  choice.  Some  will  prefer,  perhaps,  to  apply  the  fund 
to  the  extinction  of  debt,  now  burdensome,  created  for  internal  improve- 
ment ;  some  to  new  objects  of  internal  improvement ;  others  to  education ; 
and  others  again  to  colonization.  It  may  be  supposed  possible  that  the 
States  will  divert  the  fund  from  the  specified  purposes.  But  against  such 
a  misapplication  we  have,  in  the  first  place,  the  security  which  arises  out 
of  their  presumed  good  faith ;  and,  in  the  second,  the  power  to  withhold 
subsequent,  if  there  has  been  any  abuse  in  previous,  appropriations. 

It  has  been  argued  that  the  general  government  has  no  power  in  respect 
to  colonization.  Waiving  that,  as  not  being  a  question  at  this  time,  the 
real  inquiry  is,  have  the  States  themselves  any  such  power?  For  it  is  to 
the  States  that  the  subject  is  referred.  The  evil  of  a  free  black  population, 
is  not  restricted  to  particular  States,  but  extends  to,  and  is  felt  by,  all.  It  is 
not,  therefore,  the  slave  question,  but  totally  distinct  from  and  unconnected 
with  it.  I  have  heretofore  often  expressed  my  perfect  conviction,  that  the 
general  government  has  no  constitutional  power  which  it  can  exercise  in 
regard  to  African  slavery.  That  conviction  remains  unchanged.  The 
States  in  which  slavery  is  tolerated,  have  exclusively  in  their  own  hands  the 
entire  regulation  of  the  subject.  But  the  slave  States  differ  in  opinion  as 
to  the  expediency  of  African  colonization.  Several  of  them  have  signified 
their  approbation  of  it.  The  Legislature  of  Kentucky,  I  believe  unani- 
mously, recommended  the  encouragement  of  colonization  to  Congress. 

Should  a  war  break  out  during  the  term  of  five  years,  that  the  operation 
of  the  bill  is  limited  to,  the  fund  is  to  be  withdrawn  and  applied  to  the 
vigorous  prosecution  of  the  war.  If  there  be  no  war,  Congress,  at  the  end 
of  the  term,  will  be  able  to  ascertain  whether  the  money  has  been  benefi- 
cially expended,  and  to  judge  of  the  propriety  of  continuing  the  distribu- 
tion. 

Three  reports  have  been  made,  on  this  great  subject  of  the  public  lands, 
during  the  present  session  of  Congress,  besides  that  of  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury  at  its  commencement — two  in  the  Senate  and  one  ip  the  House. 
All  three  of  them  agree,  first,  in  the  preservation  of  the  control  of  the  gen- 
eral government  over  the  public  lands ;  and,  secondly,  they  concur  in  re- 
jecting the  plan  of  a  cession  of  the  public  lands  to  the  States  in  which 
they  are  situated,  recommended  by  the  secretary.  The  land  committee  of 
the  Senate  propose  an  assignment  of  fifteen  per  centum  of  the  net  pro- 
ceeds, besides  the  five  per  centum  stipulated  in  the  compacts,  (making 
together  twenty  per  centum),  to  the  new  States,  and  nothing  to  the  old. 

The  committee  on  manufactures  of  the  Senate,  after  an  allotment  of  an 
additional  sum  of  ten  per  centum  to  the  new  States,  propose  an  equal  dis- 


ON   THE  PUBLIC   LANDS.  515 

tribution  of  the  residue  among  all  the  States,  old  and  new,  upon  equitable 
principles. 

The  Senate's  land  committee,  besides  the  proposal  of  a  distribution,  re- 
stricted to  the  new  States,  recommends  an  immediate  reduction  of  the  price 
of  "  fresh  lands,"  to  a  minimum  of  one  dollar  per  acre,  and  to  fifty  cents  per 
acre  for  lands  which  have  been  five  years  or  upward  in  market. 

The  land  committee  of  the  House  is  opposed  to  all  distribution,  general 
or  partial,  and  recommends  a  reduction  of  the  price  to  one  dollar  per  acre. 

And  now,  Mr.  President,  I  have  a  few  more  words  to  say,  and  shall  be 
done.  We  are  admonished  by  all  our  reflections,  and  by  existing  signs,  of 
the  duty  of  communicating  strength  and  energy  to  the  glorious  Union 
which  now  encircles  our  favored  country.  Among  the  ties  which  bind  us 
together,  the  public  domain  merits  high  consideration.  And  if  we  appro- 
priate, for  a  limited  time,  the  proceeds  of  that  great  resource,  among  the 
several  States,  for  the  important  objects  which  have  been  enumerated,  a 
new  and  powerful  bond  of  affection  and  of  interest  will  be  added.  The 
States  will  feel  and  recognize  the  operation  of  the  general  government,  not 
merely  in  power  and  burdens,  but  in  benefactions  and  blessings.  And  the 
general  government  in  its  turn  will  feel,  from  the  expenditure  of  the  money 
which  it  dispenses  to  the  States,  the  benefits  of  moral  and  intellectual  im- 
provement of  the  people,  of  greater  facility  in  social  and  commercial  in- 
tercourse, and  of  the  purification  of  the  population  of  our  country,  them- 
selves the  best  parental  sources  of  national  character,  national  union,  and 
national  greatness.  Whatever  may  be  the  fate  of  the  particular  proposi- 
tion now  under  consideration,  I  sincerely  hope  that  the  attention  of  the 
nation  may  be  attracted  to  this  most  interesting  subject ;  that  it  may  justly 
appreciate  the  value  of  this  immense  national  property  ;  and  that  preserv- 
ing the  regulation  of  it  by  the  will  of  the  whole,  for  the  advantage  of  the 
whole,  it  may  it  be  transmitted,  as  a  sacred  and  inestimable  succession,  to 
posterity,  for  its  benefit  and  blessing  for  ages  to  come. 


THE   NORTHEASTERN   BOUNDARY. 

IN  SENATE,  JULY  10,  1832. 

[Mr.  Clay,  both  as  Commissioner  at  Ghent  and  as  Secretary 
of  State  under  Mr.  J.  Q.  Adams,  had  had  this  subject  of  the 
North-eastern  Boundary  under  official  advisement,  and  was, 
therefore,  well  qualified  to  speak  upon  it.  President  Jackson, 
as  Mr.  Clay  thought,  had  asked  advice  of  the  Senate  prema- 
turely, as  no  treaty  had  been  made.  He  submitted  only  the 
award  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  which  seemed  to  amount 
only  to  a  recommendation.  This  award  was  far  from  being  ac- 
ceptable to  the  State  of  Maine,  or  to  the  country  generally. 
Much  time  had  elapsed,  and  political  changes  of  considerable 
import  had  occurred  in  the  position  of  the  King  of  the  Nether- 
lands, since  this  question  had  been  submitted  to  him.  It  was  a 
serious  question,  even  if  he  were  not  disqualified  to  act  by  these 
changes.  Mr.  Clay  did  not  consider  that  the  subject  could  then 
be  acted  upon  by  the  Senate,  as  a  part  of  the  treaty-making 
power  ;  and  his  opinion  had  influence  in  that  body.  The  whole 
subject  was  finally  given  the  go-by,  and  the  controversy  was 
at  last  settled  in  1842  by  Lord  Ashburton  and  Mr.  Webster, 
which  gave  repose  to  both  countries,  after  an  agitation  of  nearly 
thirty  years. 

Intending  to  express,  in  a  few  words,  my  sentiments  on  this  subject,  I 
have  thought  I  might  as  well  embrace  this  occasion  to  do  it.  The  presi- 
dent has  called  upon  the  Senate  for  its  advice,  as  to  the  award  of  the  King 
of  the  Netherlands,  respecting  the  north-eastern  boundary  of  the  United 
States.  This  call  upon  the  Senate  is  made,  not  in  its  legislative  character, 
but  as  a  component  part  of  the  treaty-making  power.  If  the  senate, 
therefore,  should  give  any  advice  on  the  matter,  it  must  act. in  its  executive 
capacity,  and  according  to  those  rules  which  govern  it  when  so  acting. 
Among  these,  is  that  which  requires  the  concurrence  of  two  thirds  of  the 
senators  present. 

The  language  of  the  Constitution,  taken  literally,  would  perhaps  require 
a  participation  of  the  Senate  in  the  original  formation  of  all  treaties.     The 


ON  THE   NORTH-EASTERN  BOUNDARY.  517 

words  are,  "  he  (the  president)  shall  have  power  by  and  with  the  advice 
and  consent  of  the  Senate,  to  make  treaties ;  provided  two  thirds  of  the 
senators  present  concur."  In  the  early  stages  of  his  administration,  Gen- 
eral Washington  endeavored  to  execute  this  part  of  the  Constitution  ac- 
cording to  its  literal  interpretation  ;  but  he  soon  found  it  impracticable, 
and  abandoned  it.  The  difficulty  of  consulting  so  large  a  body,  as  to  the 
instructions  to  be  given  to  a  foreign  minister  ;  the  variety  of  propositions 
which  may  be  interchanged  in  the  progress  of  a  negotiation,  and  the  in- 
convenience of  a  perpetual  recurrence  to  the  Senate  for  its  opinion  upon 
each  of  them,  beside  other  considerations,  rendered  it  altogether  inexpe- 
dient to  take  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  Senate  previously  to  the  con- 
clusion of  treaties.  When  concluded,  President  Washington  thought  the 
purport  of  the  Constitution  would  be  satisfied  by  submitting  them  to  the 
Senate  ;  as  they  could  not  be  said  to  be  made,  in  the  language  of  the 
Constitution,  until  the  Senate  gave  its  constitutional  concurrence  to  their 
becoming  obligatory  national  compacts. 

Accordingly,  from  an  early  period,  in  the  first  term  of  his  administration 
down  to  the  present  time,  the  settled  and  uniform  practice  of  the  execu- 
tive government  has  been,  to  open  negotiations  with  foreign  powers,  and 
to  conclude  such  treaties  as  the  president  conceives  the  interests  of  this 
country  demand.  When  so  concluded,  they  are  submitted  to  the  Senate 
for  its  constitutional  advice  and  consent.  And  the  extent  of  any  agency 
which  the  Senate  exercises,  in  the  formation  of  a  treaty,  is  limited  to 
proposing,  as  was  done  in  the  treaty  of  Mr.  Jay,  in  1794,  amendments  to 
the  treaty.     These  become  the  subject  of  future  negotiation. 

To  this  established  practice  of  the  government,  the  present  adminis- 
tration has  hitherto,  itself,  conformed.  And  I  presume  it  is  not  intended 
to  change  it,  and  to  revive  the  impracticable  course  which  General  Wash- 
ington was  compelled  to  abandon,  from  experience. 

What,  then,  are  the  circumstances  of  the  case  which  the  president  has 
brought  here  for  the  consideration  of  the  Senate  ?  In  virtue  of  several 
treaties  between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  on  all  of  which 
treaties  the  Senate  had  regularly  acted  and  given  its  advice  and  consent, 
the  disputed  north-eastern  boundary  was  submitted  to  the  decision  of  the 
King  of  the  Netherlands,  as  the  arbitrator  between  the  two  contracting 
parties,  to  decide  the  controversy.  The  king  has  pronounced  his  judgment, 
and  communicated  his  award  to  each  of  the  parties.  Various  questions 
have  been  started  as  to  the  validity  of  this  instrument.  Such  as,  whether 
it  was  intended  as  a  decision  binding  the  parties ;  whether  it  does  not 
transcend  the  authority  vested  in  the  king,  by  the  terms  of  the  submission  ; 
whether  it  can  be  regarded  as  any  thing  more  than  the  advice  or  recom- 
mendation of  the  king  as  to  a  suitable  boundary,  which  either  party  is  at 
liberty  to  adopt  or  not,  at  his  discretion  ? 

Whatever  may  be  the  real  character  of  this  royal  act,  no  treaty,  in  con- 
sequence of  it,  has  been  concluded  between  the  United  States  and  Great 


518  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

Britain,  as  far  as  the  Senate  is  advised.  It  stands  upon  its  own  isolated 
ground.  The  president  has  asked  the  Senate  to  advise  him  whether  he 
shall  sanction  the  award,  and  the  report  of  the  committee  on-  foreign  rela- 
tions, now  before  us,  recommends  that  the  government  of  Great  Britain  be 
notified  of  the  acquiescence  in  it  by  the  government  of  the  United  States. 

Now,  Mr.  President,  it  seems  to  me,  that,  in  the  present  state  of  the 
transaction,  there  is  nothing  brought  by  the  president  to  our  consideration, 
on  which  the  Senate,  as  a  part  of  the  treaty-making  or  executive  power, 
can  constitutionally  act.  There  is  no  treaty  presented  to  us  for  our  advice 
and  consent,  not  even  a  negotiation  proposed,  nor,  in  short,  any  basis  what- 
ever for  the  action  of  the  Senate.  If  the  award  of  the  King  of  the  Neth- 
erlands be  binding,  it  derives  its  validity  from  the  consent  of  the  parties 
referring  the  question  to  him,  and  from  his  having  decided  the  case,  in 
conformity  with  the  terms  of  the  submission.  If  he  has  not  decided  it, 
or  if  in  deciding  it  he  has  transcended  the  terms  of  the  submission,  it  is 
not  binding  and  obligatory.  The  president  being  the  only  constitutional 
organ  of  the  people  of  the  United  States,  in  all  communications  with  for- 
eign powers,  and  moreover  charged  with  the  execution  of  the  laws  and 
treaties  of  the  United  States,  is  bound  to  notify  the  British  government 
what  are  the  executive  views  in  relation  to  the  award.  If  he  tells  that 
government  that  this  does  not  hold  itself  bound  by  the  award,  a  negotia- 
tion would  probably  take  place  between  the  parties.  If,  on  the  contrary, 
the  president  notifies  the  British  government  that  the  United  States  are 
bound  by  the  award,  he  would  have  to  come  to  Congress  for  its  legislative 
aid  in  carryiug  into  effect  the  award.  And  should  he  so  come,  the  question 
of  the  validity  of  the  award  would  be  as  open  to  the  examination  of  Con- 
gress as  it  had  been  to  the  president.  So,  if  any  negotiation  which  may 
be  opened  with  Great  Britain,  in  relation  to  the  award,  should  terminate  in 
the  conclusion  of  a  treaty,  the  president  would  be  bound  to  submit  that 
treaty  to  the  Senate  for  its  constitutional  advice  and  consent.  The  presi- 
dent not  having  applied  to  Congress  for  any  act  of  legislation,  and  having 
submitted  no  treaty  or  national  compact,  in  any  form,  to  this  body,  I  think 
there  is  nothing  before  us  on  which  we  can  constitutionally  act ;  and  that 
any  advice  which,  under  these  circumstances,  we  might  offer  to  the  presi- 
dent, would  have  no  warrant  or  authority  in  the  Constitution  of  the  United 
States.  I  can  not,  therefore,  consent  to  vote  for  the  resolution  reported  by 
the  committee  on  foreign  relations,  or  to  concur  in  the  adoption  of  any 
other  resolution  which  would  imply  the  right  of  the  Senate  to  express  any 
opinion  on  the  matter  in  its  present  state  and  condition. 

"While  this  is  my  deliberate  judgment,  I  have  no  hesitation  to  offer  to 
the  president,  if  he  would  attach  any  consequence  to  them,  my  views  and 
opinions,  as  a  private  citizen,  on  the  whole  matter  of  the  north-eastern 
boundary.  At  Ghent,  Great  Britain  did  not  assert  any  right  to  the  terri- 
tory to  which  she  subsequently  set  up  a  claim.  She  sought  there  to  obtain 
by  negotiation,  and  exchange  of  territory  with  the  United  States,  a  passage 


ON    THE    NORTH-EASTERN    BOUNDARY.  519 

within  her  own  jurisdiction  from  Nova  Scotia  and  New  Brunswick  to 
Quebec.  The  British  commissioners  were  told  by  the  American,  on  that 
occasion,  that  they  had  no  power  to  cede  away  or  exchange  any  part  of 
the  territory  of  Massachusetts,  which  then  included  Maine.  As  there  were 
many  parts  of  the  long  line  of  boundary  between  the  United  States  and 
Great  Britain  unsettled  and  unmarked,  it  became  necessaiy  to  have  it  cor- 
rectly ascertained  and  defined.  For  this  purpose  several  boards  of  com- 
missioners were  provided  for  by  the  treaty  of  Ghent,  in  the  same  manner 
as  a  similar  board  had  been  created  by  a  previous  treaty.  Most  of  these 
boards  have  amicably  and  satisfactorily  settled  the  questions  respectively 
submitted  to  them.  That  to  which  was  referred  the  boundary  now  in  dis- 
pute could  not  agree.  Before  this  board,  Great  Britain  brought  forward 
and  claimed  as  her  right,  that  which  she  had  sought  to  obtain  by  negotia- 
tion only,  at  the  conferences  of  Ghent.  And  the  perseverance  with  which 
she  has  prosecuted  her  pretensions,  and  the  apparent  success  with  which 
they  have  been  so  far  finally  crowned,  demonstrate  that  there  never  need 
be  despair  in  any  cause,  however  bad. 

During  my  service  in  an  executive  department,  it  became  my  duty  to 
examine  into  this  claim  asserted  by  Great  Britain ;  and  the  result  was  a 
firm  persuasion  and  a  strong  conviction  that  it  was  unfounded,  and  that  the 
right  to  the  disputed  territory  was  in  the  State  of  Maine.  It  is  true  that, 
in  the  treaty  of  peace  of  1783,  owing  to  the  imperfect  knowledge  possessed 
of  the  country  through  which  the  boundary  runs,  there  is  some  defective 
description,  but  the  intention  of  the  parties  I  think  is  clear,  and  according 
to  that  intention  the  right  is  with  Maine,  and  not  in  Great  Britain.  It  is 
altogether  unnecessary,  upon  this  occasion,  to  proceed  to  state  all  the 
grounds  and  considerations  which  brought  my  mind  to  that  conclusion. 
By  doing  so,  I  should  be  trespassing  upon  the  Senate  too  much. 

The  commissioners  not  having  been  able  to  settle  the  question,  the  casus 
foederis,  provided  for  in  former  treaties,  arose,  and  it  became  necessaiy  to 
submit  the  question  to  an  arbiter.  The  King  of  the  Netherlands  was  se- 
lected for  that  purpose,  and  we  all  know  the  subsequent  events.  The 
statements,  arguments,  and  papers  of  the  parties,  were  all  prepared  within 
the  two  countries  respectively,  and  transmitted  to  Holland,  where  they 
were  submitted  to  the  king.  In  consenting  to  refer  the  question,  the  late 
administration  was  impelled  by  the  duty  of  respecting  the  national  faith, 
as  pledged  in  solemn  treaties.  And  although  the  King  of  the  Netherlands 
was  not  the  first  choice  of  either  party,  high  confidence  was  reposed  in  his 
independence,  and  in  his  ability,  and  integrity,  by  the  late  president  of  the 
United  States. 

"With  respect  to  the  conduct  of  the  arbitration  on  the  part  of  our  gov- 
ernment, there  are  some  circumstances  to  be  deeply  regretted.  The  plan 
adopted  by  the  late  administration  was  to  have  retained  Mr.  Hughes  at  the 
Hague,  elevated  him  to  the  rank  of  minister  plenipotentiary,  and  send  out 
Mr.  Preble  as  a  public  agent  to  be  associated  with  him.     I  scarcely  know 


520  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

any  man  so  well  qualified  for  such  a  service  as  Mr.  Hughes.  He  had  the 
benefit  of  much  diplomatic  experience,  and  he  had  been  very  successful  in 
various  negotiations  which  he  had  conducted.  Commencing  bis  career  as 
secretary  of  tbe  commission  at  Ghent,  he  subsequently  had  creditably  rep- 
resented his  government  at  Stockholm,  and  at  St.  Petersburg,  and  at 
Copenhagen,  on  temporary  missions;  and  he  had  been  some  time  at  the 
court  of  the  Netherlands.  Wherever  he  had  been,  he  uniformly  made 
good  impressions,  and  conciliated  the  esteem  and  friendship  of  all  whose 
acquaintance  he  formed.  He  was  well  versed  in  the  language  of  the  court 
of  the  Hague,  and  well  acquainted  with  all  the  persons  having  access  to, 
or  surrounding  the  king.  Of  pleasing  and  winning  manners,  a  general 
favorite,  he  was  exactly  such  a  person  as  was  well  fitted  for  the  service. 
The  rank  of  minister  plenipotentiary  was  necessary  to  entitle  him  to  ap- 
proach the  person  of  the  king,  according  to  established  usage.  It  was  a 
point  of  more  importance  that  this  government  should  have  had  such  a 
representative  at  Holland,  as  the  British  government  was  there  represented 
by  an  accomplished  embassador  (Sir  Charles  Bagot),  well  known  here. 
Mr.  Hughes,  intimately  acquainted  with  the  corps  diplomatique,  with  all 
the  avenues  of  access  to  the  king,  and  with  all  persons  likely  to  influence 
the  mind  or  judgment  of  the  monarch  or  his  ministers,  would  have  been 
able  to  discover  and  avert  the  exercise  of  any  undue  influence,  if  any 
should  be  brought  to  bear  upon  the  government  of  the  Netherlands  in  this 
delicate  transaction. 

It  was  among  the  early  acts  of  this  administration  to  overturn  the  plan 
which  had  been  thus  resolved  on  by  its  predecessors,  and,  in  place  of  Mr. 
Hughes,  to  send  out  Mr.  Preble,  in  the  sole  charge  of  conducting  a  difficult 
arbitration.  I  have  had  only  a  limited  acquaintance  with  this  gentleman  ; 
but  he  was  destitute  of  all  diplomatic  experience,  had  never  been  in  the 
councils  of  the  general  government,  and  I  understand  could  not  either  speak 
or  write  the  lanaruaare  of  the  court  to  which  he  was  sent,  and  where  he  was 
a  total  stranger.  He  was  indeed  a  respectable  lawyer  in  his  own  State, 
but  of  what  avail  would  professional  eminence  be,  where  tact,  insinuating 
manners,  and  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  persons  of  the  court,  were 
indispensable  ? 

The  result  of  an  arbitration  conducted  under  such  auspices  was  to  be 
feared.  During  its  progress,  and  before  the  king's  decision,  he  was  stripped 
by  the  revolution  in  Belgium,  of  the  better  half  of  his  dominions.  Had 
he  been  '  narch  of  Holland  alone,  I  think  I  hazard  nothing  in  saying, 
that,  notwithstanding  the  confidence  which  Mr.  Adams  reposed  in  his  per- 
sonal character,  he  would  not  have  been  selected  with  the  concurrence 
of  the  late  administration,  as  the  sovereign  arbiter.  It  was  to  an  inde- 
pendent sovereign,  one  the  extent  of  whose  power  and  dominions  placed 
him  at  the  head  of  the  second-rate  states  of  the  continent  of  Europe,  that 
the  controversy  was  submitted.  It  was  not  to  the  King  of  Holland,  but  to 
the  King  of  Holland  and  Belgium,  that  the  question  was  referred.     It  was 


ON   THE   NORTH-EASTERN    BOUNDARY.  521 

to  a  monarch  supposed  to  be  unbiased,  powerful,  and  independent,  that  the 
question  was  referred,  and  not  to  a  sovereign  who,  while  lie  was  arbitrating 
between  Great  Britain  and  the  United  States  as  to  the  territory  of  Maine, 
by  the  uncontrollable  force  of  events,  found  one  half  of  his  own  dominions 
the  subject  of  British  arbitration  or  decision,  in  conjunction  with  the  other 
allied  powers. 

By  the  loss  of  Belgium,  the  political  character  of  the  king  was  entirely 
changed,  his  identity  altered,  and  he  ceased  to  be  that  monarch  whose 
friendly  arbitration  had  been  solicited.  Mr.  Preble  saw  the  matter  in  its 
true  light,  and  expected  to  have  been  notified  by  the  minister  of  foreign 
affairs  of  the  king's  declining  to  proceed  in  the  arbitration.  But  he  said 
nothing,  and  did  nothing,  to  produce  that  result.  Had  Mr.  Hughes  been 
there,  he  would,  by  a  suggestion  or  a  hint,  not  at  all  offensive  (such  as, 
whether  the  critical  condition  of  his  own  domestic  affairs  did  not  afford 
sufficient  occupation  for  his  majesty,  without  troubling  himself  with 
the  concerns  of  foreign  governments,  in  which  his  own  subjects  had  no 
interest),  have  prevailed  on  the  king  to  give  up  the  papers ;  or,  at  least, 
to  suspend  proceeding  in  the  arbitration  until  he  could  receive  fresh  in- 
structions from  his  own  government,  adapted  to  the  great  event  which  had 
happened. 

But  nothing  was  done  at  the  Hague  or  at  Washington  to  arrest  or  sus- 
pend the  progress  of  the  arbitration.  We  have  neither  seen  nor  heard  of 
any  instructions  from  our  Secretary  of  State,  founded  on  the  event  just 
mentioned.  A  senator  (now  in  my  eye)  informed  me,  that  he  had  con- 
versed with  the  late  Secretary  of  State  about  the  revolt  of  Belgium, 
and  asked  him  if  it  would  not  put  a  stop  to  the  arbitration.  To  which 
the  secretary  answered,  that  he  supposed  of  course  it  would ;  and  yet,  as 
far  as  we  know,  he  gave  no  instructions  whatever  in  relation  to  that  event ! 
Under  all  these  circumstances,  our  surprise  at  the  issue  of  the  arbitration 
ought  to  be  less  than  it  otherwise  would  have  been.  If  the  King  of  the 
Netherlands  had  definitively  decided  the  questions  actually  submitted  to 
him,  iu  consequence  of  the  silent  acquiescence  of  our  government  in  the 
progress  of  arbitration,  the  honor  and  faith  of  the  nation  might  have 
bound  us  to  submit  to  the  decision,  however  unjust  we  deem  it.  But,  Mr. 
President,  I  can  not  concur  with  the  committee  on  foreign  relations,  in 
considering  the  paper  communicated  by  the  King  of  Holland  to  the  two 
governments  as  containing  a  decision.  It  seems  to  me  to  express  only  the 
opinion  of  that  monarch,  as  to  what  he  thinks  might  be  a  suitable  bound- 
ary, and  to  operate  as  a  recommendation  to  the  parties  to  adopt  it  ;  but 
leaving  them,  at  the  same  time,  at  full  liberty  to  adopt  it  or  not,  at  their 
discretion.  So  far  from  being  a  decision,  the  king  professes  his  inability 
to  decide  the  question  submitted  to  him,  for  reasons  which  he  states,  and 
he  does  not  decide  it,  according  to  the  terms  of  the  submission. 

Nor  can  I  concur  with  that  committee  in  believing,  that  we  shall  be  in 
danger  of  incurring  the  reproaches  of  the  world  for  not  submitting  to  such 


522  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

an  award,  if  award  it  can  be  called.  I  am  quite  sure,  that  the  chairman 
of  the  committee  on  foreign  affairs,  or  the  present  Secretary  of  State,  would 
be  fully  competent  to  make  out  an  argument  in  behalf  of  the  rights  of 
Maine,  that  would  fully  vindicate  then,  and  vindicate  the  course  of  govern- 
ment, from  all  reproaches,  fouuded  on  noncompliance  with  the  advice  and 
recommendation  of  the  sovereign  arbiter. 

Entertaining  these  sentiments,  as  a  private  citizen,  I  have  no  hesitation 
in  expressing  my  opinion  that  the  American  government,  disregarding,  and 
declining  to  be  bound  by,  the  award,  ought  to  open  a  negotiation  with 
Great  Britain  on  the  subject  of  this  disputed  boundary.  I  have  no  appre- 
hensions that  such  a  step  would,  necessarily,  bring  on  war.  Great  Britain 
might  have  adopted  one  of  two  courses :  either  to  proceed  to  occupy  the 
territory  which  the  sovereign  arbiter  thinks  it  would  be  suitable  for  her  to 
possess,  and  signified  her  determination  to  do  so ;  or,  to  communicate  to 
our  government  her  willingness  to  be  governed  by  the  advice  of  the  ar- 
biter, and  inquired  as  to  the  intentions,  on  that  subject,  of  this  government. 
The  former  course  would  have  been  harsh,  and  might  have  involved  the 
two  countries  in  war.  The  latter  was  more  respectful,  and,  having  been 
adopted  by  Great  Britain,  it  will  be  natural  and  easy  to  return  an  answer 
to  the  diplomatic  note  which  has  been  received,  stating  the  grounds  and 
arguments  which  induce  the  American  government  to  believe  itself  not 
bound  by  what  has  been  done  by  the  King  of  Holland.  Such  an  answer 
would  be  preliminary  to  a  negotiation,  which  would  necessarily  follow.  It 
is  desirable,  undoubtedly,  to  have  all  controversies  between  nations  settled, 
and  amicably,  if  possible.  But  this  is  not  the  only  question  remaining  to 
be  decided  between  the  two  powers,  and  if  that  mutual  respect  and 
friendly  disposition  which,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  may  predominate  in  the 
official  intercourse  between  the  two  countries,  should  prevail,  although 
the  dispute,  by  the  intervention  of  the  Dutch  king,  has  been  somewhat 
complicated,  we  need  not,  I  think,  despair  finally  of  some  satisfactory  ar- 
rangement. 

These  are  my  private  views,  Mr.  President.  But  I  think  the  president 
has  come  to  the  Senate  too  soon,  or  come  to  it  in  a  wrong  character.  As 
a  part  of  the  executive  government,  I  think  the  Senate  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  question,  in  the  present  state  of  it.  Holding  this  opinion,  I  shall 
vote  against  the  resolution  reported  by  the  committee  on  foreign  affairs,  and 
I  shall  vote  against  any  other  resolution  or  proposition  which  may  imply 
or  assume  a  power  in  the  Senate  of  the  United  States  to  act  in  the  case. 
The  president,  it  seems  to  me,  is  invested,  exclusively,  with  the  power  of 
deciding,  in  the  first  instance,  whether  any  and  what  obligations,  if  any, 
have  been  created  upon  the  American  government,  in  consequence  of  tho 
act  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands  ;  and  whether  it  be  expedient  or  not 
to  open  a  negotiation  with  Great  Britain.  And  I  think  he  should  be  left 
to  his  constitutional  responsibility,  to  pursue  such  a  course  as  a  sense  of 
duty  may  prompt. 


ON  PRESIDENT  JACKSON'S  VETO  OF  THE 

BANK  BILL. 

IN  SENATE,  JULY  10,   1832. 

[General  Jackson's  hostility  to  the  Bank  of  the  United 
States,  is  well  understood  to  have  arisen  from  the  refusal  of 
certain  officers  of  the  hank  to  submit  to  his  interference  in  mat- 
ters where  he  had  no  right.  This  resistance  of  the  officers  was 
proper  ;  but  the  will  of  General  Jackson  was  not  a  thing  to  be 
trifled  with.  It  was  rule  or  ruin  with  him  ;  and  never  was  the 
maxim  more  fully  realized  than  in  this  case.  General  Jackson 
held  the  fate  of  the  bank  in  his  hand,  and  was  resolved  to  crush 
it  out,  if  he  could  not  have  his  way  in  the  management  of  its 
affairs.  The  connection  of  the  bank  with  the  business  of  the 
country,  and  as  the  fiscal  agent  of  the  Government,  was  on  an 
immense  scale.  As  the  bank  had  done  so  well,  and  become  so 
essential  to  trade,  there  was  little  doubt  that  its  charter  would 
be  renewed,  and  the  public  depended  upon  it.  The  veto,  there- 
fore, was  a  great  shock  to  the  business  of  the  country.  There 
were  thirty  millions  of  loan  to  the  great  West,  and  probably  twice 
— perhaps  thrice — that  amount  elsewhere  ;  all  of  which  must  be 
paid  in  the  liquidation  of  the  affairs  of  the  bank.  The  winding 
up  of  this  bank  was  a  complete  break-up  of  the  usual  channels 
of  business  throughout  the  country,  and  it  was  undoubtedly 
the  primary  cause  of  the  great  commercial  revulsion  of  1836-7. 
For,  in  the  regulation  and  supply  of  a  sound  currency,  it  would 
without  doubt  have  prevented  that  great  disaster. 

It  is  singular  what  an  amount  and  perpetuity  of  popular  prej- 
udice against  the  Bank  of  the  United  States  General  Jackson 
was  capable  of  stirring  up.  A  majority  of  the  people  think  to 
this  day  (1856)  that  the  Pennsylvania  Bank  of  the  United 
States  was  the  same  which  General  Jackson  vetoed,  and  that  its 
failure  proved  that  General  Jackson  was  right.  The  idea  of  a 
national  bank  has  been  unpopular  ever  since,  and  no  party  could 
bear  the  odium  of  such  a  policy ;  and  yet  the  Bank  of  the 


524  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 


0 


United  States  was  an  institution  that  proved  most  important  to 
the  Government  and  most  useful  to  the  country.  No  party  ever 
lost  any  thing  by  it,  and  all  parties  were  benefited.  It  was  the 
best  fiscal  agent  for  the  government  that  could  be  devised  ;  it 
regulated  the  currency,  and  operated  as  a  check  on  the  issues  of 
unsound  State  banks.  But  as  soon  as  the  national  bank  was 
broken  up,  the  State  banks  rushed  into  the  vacuum,  and  flooded 
the  country  with  an  unsound  currency,  the  disastrous  effects  of 
which  have  never  been  entirely  effaced,  simply  because  no  coun- 
try, under  a  high  civilization,  can  do  well  without  a  national 
bank.] 

I  have  some  observations  to  submit  on  this  question,  which  I  would  not 
trespass  on  the  Senate  in  offering,  but  that  it  has  some  command  of  leisure, 
in  consequence  of  the  conference  which  has  been  agreed  upon,  in  respect 
to  the  tariff. 

A  bill  to  re-charter  the  bank,  has  recently  passed  Congress,  after  much 
deliberation.  In  this  body,  we  know  tbat  there  are  members  enough  who 
entertain  no  constitutional  scruples,  to  make,  with  the  vote  by  which  the 
bill  was  passed,  a  majority  of  two  thirds.  In  the  House  of  Representatives, 
also,  it  is  believed,  there  is  a  like  majority  in  favor  of  the  bill.  Notwith- 
standing this  state  of  things,  the  president  has  rejected  the  bill,  and  trans- 
mitted to  the  Senate  an  elaborate  message,  communicating  at  large  his  ob- 
jections. The  Constitution  requires  that  we  should  reconsider  the  bill,  and 
that  the  question  of  its  passage,  the  president's  objections  notwithstanding, 
shall  be  taken  by  ayes  and  noes.  Respect  to  him,  as  well  as  the  injunc- 
tions of  the  Constitution,  require  that  we  should  deliberately  examine  his 
reasons,  and  reconsider  the  question. 

The  veto  is  an  extraordinary  power,  which,  though  tolerated  by  the  Con- 
stitution, was  not  expected,  by  the  convention,  to  be  used  in  ordinary  cases. 
It  was  designed  for  instances  of  precipitate  legislation,  in  unguarded  mo- 
ments. Thus  restricted,  and  it  has  been  thus  restricted  by  all  former  pres- 
idents, it  might  not  be  mischievous.  During  Mr.  Madison's  administration 
of  eight  years,  there  occurred  but  two  or  three  cases  of  its  exercise.  During 
the  last  administration,  I  do  not  now  recollect  that  it  was  once.  In  a  period 
little  upward  of  three  years,  the  present  chief  magistrate  has  employed  the 
veto  four  times.  We  now  hear  quite  frequently,  in  the  progress  of 
measures  through  Congress,  the  statement  that  the  president  will  veto 
them,  urged  as  an  objection  to  their  passage. 

The  veto  is  hardly  reconcilable  with  the  genius  of  representative  govern- 
ment. It  is  totally  irreconcilable  with  it,  if  it  is  to  be  frequently  employed 
in  respect  to  the  expediency  of  measures,  as  well  as  their  constitutionality. 
It  is  a  feature  of  our  government,  borrowed  from  a  prerogative  of  the  British 
kin"-.     And  it  is  remarkable,  that  in  England  it  has  grown  obsolete,  not 


ON   PKESIDENT   JACKSON'S   VETO   OF    THE   BANK   BILL.       525 

having  been  used  for  upward  of  a  century.  At  the  commencement  of  the 
French  Revolution,  in  discussing  the  principles  of  their  Constitution,  in 
national  convention,  the  veto  held  a  conspicuous  figure.  The  gay,  laugh- 
ing population  of  Paris,  bestowed  on  the  king  the  appellation  of  Monsieur 
Veto,  and  on  the  queen,  that  of  Madame  Veto.  The  convention  finally  de- 
creed, that  if  a  measure  rejected  by  the  king,  should  obtain  the  sanction  of 
two  concurring  legislatures,  it  should  be  a  law,  notwithstanding  the  veto. 
In  the  Constitution  of  Kentucky,  and  perhaps  in  some  other  of  the  State 
Constitutions,  it  is  provided  that  if,  after  the  rejection  of  a  bill  by  the  gov- 
ernor, it  shall  be  passed  by  a  majority  of  all  the  members  elected  to  both 
Houses,  it  shall  become  a  law,  notwithstanding  the  governor's  objections- 
As  a  co-ordinate  branch  of  the  government,  the  chief  magistrate  has  great 
weight.  If,  after  a  respectful  consideration  of  his  objections  urged  against 
a  bill,  a  majority  of  all  the  members  elected  to  the  Legislature,  shall  still 
pass  it,  notwithstanding  his  official  influence,  and  the  force  of  his  reasons, 
ought  it  not  to  become  a  law  ?  Ought  the  opinion  of  one  man  to  overrule 
that  of  a  legislative  body,  twice  deliberately  expressed  ? 

It  can  not  be  imagined  that  the  Convention  contemplated  the  applica- 
tion of  the  veto,  to  a  question  which  has  been  so  long,  so  often,  and  so 
thoroughly  scrutinized,  as  that  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States,  by  every 
department  of  the  government,  in  almost  every  stage  of  its  existence,  and 
by  the  people,  and  by  the  State  legislatures.  Of  all  the  controverted 
questions  which  have  sprung  up  under  our  government,  not  one  has  been 
so  fully  investigated  as  that  of  its  power  to  establish  a  bank  of  the  United 
States.  More  than  seventeen  years  ago,  in  January,  1815,  Mr.  Madison 
then  said,  in  a  message  to  the  Senate  of  the  United  States  : 

"  Waiving  the  question  of  the  constitutional  authority  of  the  Legislature  to 
establish  an  incorporated  bank,  as  being  precluded,  in  my  judgment,  by  repeated 
recognitions,  under  varied  circumstances,  of  the  validity  of  such  an  institution, 
in  acts  of  the  legislative,  executive,  and  judicial  branches  of  the  government, 
accompanied  by  indications,  in  different  modes,  of  a  concurrence  of  the  general 
will  of  the  nation." 

Mr.  Madison,  himself  opposed  to  the  first  bank  of  the  United  States, 
yielded  his  own  convictions  to  those  of  the  nation,  and  all  the  departments 
of  the  government  thus  often  expressed.  Subsequently  to  this  true  but 
6trong  statement  of  the  case,  the  present  bank  of  the  United  States  was 
established,  and  numerous  other  acts,  of  all  the  departments  of  government 
manifesting  their  settled  sense  of  the  power,  have  been  added  to  those 
which  existed  prior  to  the  date  of  Mr.  Madison's  message. 

No  question  has  been  more  generally  discussed,  within  the  last  two 
years,  by  the  people  at  large,  and  in  State  Legislatures,  than  that  of  the 
bank.  And  this  consideration  of  it  has  been  prompted  by  the  president 
himself.  In  the  first  message  to  Congress  (in  December,  1829)  he  brought 
the  subject  to  the  view  of  that  body  and  the  nation,  and  expressly  declared, 


526  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

that  it  could  not,  for  the  interest  of  all  concerned,  be  "  too  soon"  settled. 
In  each  of  his  subsequent  annual  messages,  in  1830,  and  1831,  he  again 
invited  the  attention  of  Congress  to  the  subject.  Thus,  after  an  interval 
of  two  years,  and  after  the  intervention  of  the  election  of  a  new  Congress, 
the  president  deliberately  renews  the  chartering  of  the  bank  of  the  United 
States.  And  yet  his  friends  now  declare  the  agitation  of  the  question  to 
be  premature !  It  was  not  premature,  in  1829,  to  present  the  question, 
but  it  is  premature  in  1832  to  consider  and  decide  it ! 

After  the  president  had  directed  public  attention  to  this  question,  it  be- 
came not  only  a  topic  of  popular  conversation,  but  was  discussed  in  the 
press,  and  employed  as  a  theme  in  popular  elections.  I  was  myself  inter- 
rogated, on  more  occasions  than  one,  to  make  a  public  expression  of  my 
sentiments ;  and  a  friend  of  mine  in  Kentucky,  a  candidate  for  the  State 
Legislature,  told  me  nearly  two  years  ago,  that  he  was  surprised,  in  an  ob- 
scure part  of  his  county  (the  hills  of  Benson),  where  there  was  but  littl© 
occasion  for  banks,  to  find  himself  questioned  on  the  stump,  as  to  the  re- 
charter  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States.  It  seemed  as  if  a  sort  of  gen- 
eral order  had  gone  out  from  head-quarters,  to  the  partisans  of  the  admin- 
istration, everywhere,  to  agitate  and  make  the  most  of  the  question- 
They  have  clone  so,  and  their  condition  now  reminds  me  of  the  fable  in- 
vented by  Dr.  Franklin,  of  the  eagle  and  the  cat,  to  demonstrate  that 
^Esop  bad  not  exhausted  invention,  in  the  construction  of  his  memorable 
fables.  The  eagle,  you  know,  Mr.  President,  pounced  from  his  lofty  flight 
in  the  air,  upon  a  cat,  taking  it  to  be  a  pig.  Having  borne  off  his  prize, 
he  quickly  felt  most  painfully  the  paws  of  the  cat,  thrust  deeply  into  his 
sides  and  body.  While  flying,  he  held  a  parley  with  the  supposed  pig, 
and  proposed  to  let  go  his  hold,  if  the  other  would  let  him  alone.  No, 
says  puss,  you  brought  me  from  yonder  earth  below,  and  I  will  hold  fast 
to  you  until  you  carry  me  back — a  condition  to  which  the  eagle  readily 
assented. 

The  friends  of  the  president,  who  have  been  for  nearly  three  years  agi- 
tating this  question,  now  turn  round  upon  their  opponents,  who  have 
supposed  the  president  quite  serious  and  in  earnest,  in  presenting  it  for 
public  consideration,  and  charge  them  with  prematurely  agitating  it.  And 
that  for  electioneering  purposes !  The  other  side  understands  perfectly, 
the  policy  of  preferring  an  unjust  charge,  in  order  to  avoid  a  well-founded 
accusation. 

If  there  be  an  electioneering  motive  in  the  matter,  who  have  been  actu- 
ated by  it  ?  Those  who  have  taken  the  president  at  his  word,  and  delib- 
erated on  a  measure  which  he  has  repeatedly  recommended  to  their  con- 
sideration ?  or  those  who  have  resorted  to  all  sorts  of  means  to  elude  the 
question — by  alternately  coaxing  and  threatening  the  bank  ;  by  an  extra- 
ordinary investigation  into  the  administration  of  the  bank ;  and  by  every 
species  of  postponement  and  procrastination,  during  the  progress  of  the  bilL 

Notwithstanding  all  these  dilatory  expedients,  a  majority  of  Congress, 


ON   PRESIDENT   JACKSON'S   VETO    OF    THE    BANK    BILL.        527 

prompted  by  the  will  and  the  best  interests'  of  the  nation,  passed  the  bill. 
And  I  shall  now  proceed,  with  great  respect  and  deference,  to  examine 
some  of  the  objections  to  its  becoming  a  law,  contained  in  the  president's 
message,  avoiding,  as  much  as  I  can,  a  repetition  of  what  gentlemen  have 
said  who  preceded  me.  . 

The  president  thinks  that  the  precedents,  drawn  from  the  proceedings 
of  Congress,  as  to  the  constitutional  power  to  establish  a  bank,  are  neutral- 
ized, by  their  being  two  for  and  two  against  the  authority.  H«  supposes 
that  one  Congress,  in  1811,  and  another  in  1815,  decided  against  the 
power.  Let  us  examine  both  of  these  cases.  The  LTouse  of  Representa- 
tives in  1811,  passed  the  bill  to  recharter  the  bank,  and,  consequently, 
affirmed  the  power.  The  Senate,  during  the  same  year,  were  divided, 
saventeen  and  seventeen,  and  the  vice-president  gave  the  casting  vote.  Of 
the  seventeen  who  voted  against  the  bank,  we  know  from  the  declaration 
of  the  senator  from  Maryland  (General  Smith),  now  present,  that  he  en- 
tertained no  doubt  whatever  of  the  constitutional  power  of  Congress  to 
establish  a  bank,  and  that  he  voted  on  totally  distinct  ground.  Taking 
away  his  vote  and  adding  it  to  the  seventeen  who  voted  for  the  bank,  the 
number  would  have  stood  eighteen  for,  and  sixteen  against  the  power. 
But  we  know  further,  that  Mr.  Gaillard,  Mr.  Anderson,  and  Mr.  Robinson, 
made  a  part  of  that  sixteen  ;  and  that  in  1815,  all  three  of  them  voted  for 
the  bank.  Take  those  three  votes  from  the  sixteen,  and  add  them  to  the 
eighteen,  and  the  vote  of  1811,  as  to  the  question  of  constitutional  power, 
would  have  been  twenty-one  and  thirteen.  And  of  these  thirteen,  there 
might  have  been  others,  who  were  not  governed  in  their  votes  by  any 
doubts  of  the  power. 

In  regard  to  the  Congress  of  1815,  so  far  from  their  having  entertained 
any  scruples  in  respect  to  the  power  to  establish  a  bank,  they  actually 
passed  a  bank  bill,  and  thereby  affirmed  the  power.  It  is  true  that,  by 
the  casting  vote  of  the  speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives  (Mr. 
Cheves),  they  rejected  another  bank  bill,  not  on  grounds  of  want  of 
power,  but  upon  considerations  of  expediency  in  the  particular  structure 
of  that  bank. 

Both  the  adverse  precedents,  therefore,  relied  upon  in  the  message, 
operate  directly  against  the  argument  which  they  were  brought  forward  to 
maintain.  Congress,  by  various  other  acts,  in  relation  to  the  bank  of  the 
United  States,  has  again  and  again  sanctioned  the  power.  And  I  be- 
lieve it  may  be  truly  affirmed,  that  from  the  commencement  of  the  gov- 
ernment to  this  day,  there  has  not  been  a  Congress  opposed  to  the  bank 
of  the  United  States,  upon  the  distinct  ground  of  a  want  of  power  to  es- 
tablish it. 

And  here,  Mr.  President,  I  must  request  the  indulgence  to  the  Senate, 
while  I  express  a  few  words  in  relation  to  myself. 

I  voted,  in  1811,  against  the  old  bank  of  the  United  States,  and  I  deliv- 
ered, on  that  occasion,  a  speech,  in  which,  among  other  reasons,  I  assigned 


528  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

that  of  its  being  unconstitutional.  My  speech  has  been  read  to  the  Senate, 
during  the  progress  of  this  bill,  but  the  reading  of  it  excited  no  other  re- 
gret than  that  it  was  read  in  such  a  wretched,  bungling,  mangling  manner. 
Durino-  a  long  public  life  (I  mention  the  fact  not  as  claiming  any  merit  for 
it),  the  only  great  question  on  which  I  have  ever  changed  my  opinion,  is 
that  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States.  If  the  researches  of  the  senator 
had  carried  him  a  little  further,  he  would,  by  turning  over  a  few  more 
leaves  of  the  same  book  from  which  he  read  my  speech,  have  found  that 
which  I  made  in  1816,  in  support  of  the  present  bank.  By  the  reasons 
assigned  in  it  for  the  change  of  my  opinion,  I  am  ready  to  abide  in  the 
judgment  of  the  present  generation  and  of  posterity.  In  1816,  being 
Speaker  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  it  was  perfectly  in  my  power  to 
have  said  nothing  and  done  nothing,  and  thus  have  concealed  the  change 
of  opinion  my  mind  had  undergone.  But  I  did  not  choose  to  remain  silent 
and  escape  responsibility.  I  chose  publicly  to  avow  my  actual  conversion. 
The  war  and  the  fatal  experience  of  its  disastrous  events  had  changed 
me.  Mr.  Madison,  Governor  Pleasants,  and  almost  all  the  public  men 
around  me,  my  political  friends,  had  changed  their  opinions  from  the 
same  causes. 

The  power  to  establish  a  bank  is  deduced  from  that  clause  of  the 
Constitution  which  confers  on  Congress  all  powers  necessary  and  proper 
to  carry  into  effect  the  enumerated  powers.  In  1811,1  believed  a  bank 
of  the  United  States  not  necessary,  and  that  a  safe  reliance  might  be 
placed  on  the  local  banks,  in  the  administration  of  the  fiscal  affairs  of  the 
government.  The  war  taught  us  many  lessons,  and  among  others  de- 
monstrated the  necessity  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States,  to  the  suc- 
cessful operations  of  the  government.  I  will  not  trouble  the  Senate 
with  a  perusal  of  my  speech  in  1816,  but  ask  its  permission  to  read  a  few 
extracts : 

"  But  how  stood  the  case  in  1816,  when  he  was  called  upon  to  examine  the 
powers  of  the  general  government  to  incorporate  a  national  bank?  A  total 
change  of  circumstances  was  presented — events  of  the  utmost  magnitude  had 
intervened. 

"  A  general  suspension  of  specie  payments  had  taken  place,  and  this  had  led 
to  a  train  of  circumstances  of  the  most  alarming  nature.  He  beheld,  dispersed 
over  the  immense  extent  of  the  United  States,  about  three  hundred  banking  in- 
stitutions, enjoying,  in  different  degrees,  the  confidence  of  the  public,  shaken  as 
to  them  all,  under  no  direct  control  of  the  general  government,  and  subject  to 
no  actual  responsibility  to  the  State  authorities.  These  institutions  were  emit- 
ting the  actual  currency  of  the  United  States— a  currency  consisting  of  paper, 
on  which  they  neither  paid  interest  or  principal,  while  it  was  exchanged  for  the 
paper  of  the  community,  on  which  both  were  paid.  We  saw  these  institutions, 
in  fact,  exercising  what  had  been  considered,  at  all  times,  and  in  all  countries, 
one  of  the  highest  attributes  of  sovereignty — the  regulation  of  the  current  me- 
dium of  the  country.  They  were  no  longer  competent  to  assist  the  treasury  in 
either  of  the  great  operations  of  collection,  deposit,  or  distribution  of  the  public 


ON   PKESIDENT    JACKSON'S   VETO    OF    THE    BANK    BILL.        529 

revenues.  In  fact,  the  paper  which  they  emitted,  and  which  the  treasury,  from 
the  force  of  events,  found  itself  constrained  to  receive,  was  constantly  obstruct- 
ing the  operations  of  that  department ;  for  it  would  accumulate  where  it  was 
not  wanted,  and  could  not  be  used  where  it  was  wanted,  for  the  purposes  of 
government,  without  a  ruinous  and  arbitrary  brokerage.  Every  man  who  paid 
to  or  received  from  the  government,  paid  or  received  as  much  less  than  he 
ought  to  have  done,  as  was  the  difference  between  the  medium  in  which  the 
payment  was  effected  and  specie.  Taxes  were  no  longer  uniform.  In  New 
England,  where  specie  payments  had  not  been  suspended,  the  people  were 
called  upon  to  pay  larger  contributions  than  where  they  were  suspended.  In 
Kentucky  as  much  more  was  paid  by  the  people,  in  their  taxes,  than  was  paid, 
for  example,  in  the  State  of  Ohio,  as  Kentucky  paper  was  worth  more  than 
Ohio  paper. 

"  Considering,  then,  that  the  state  of  this  currency  was  such  that  no  thinking 
man  could  contemplate  it  without  the  most  serious  alarm ;  that  it  threatened 
general  distress,  if  it  did  not  ultimately  lead  to  convulsion  and  subversion  of  the 
government ;  it  appeared  to  him  to  be  the  duty  of  Congress  to  apply  a  remedy, 
if  a  remedy  could  be  devised.  A  national  bank,  with  other  auxiliary  measures, 
was  proposed  as  that  remedy.  Mr.  Clay  said  he  determined  to  examine  the 
question  with  as  little  prejudice  as  possible,  arising  from  Ins  former  opinion ;  he 
knew  that  the  safest  course  to  him,  if  he  pursued  a  cold,  calculating  prudence, 
was  to  adhere  to  that  opinion,  right  or  wrong.  He  was  perfectly  aware  that  if 
he  changed,  or  seemed  to  change  it,  he  should  expose  himself  to  some  censure ; 
but,  looking  at  the  subject  with  the  light  shed  upon  it,  by  events  happening  since 
the  commencement  of  the  war,  he  could  no  longer  doubt.  *  *  *  He  pre- 
ferred to  the  suggestions  of  the  pride  of  consistency,  the  evident  interests  of  the 
community,  and  determined  to  throw  himself  npon  their  justice  and  candor." 

The  interest  which,  foreigners  hold  in  the  existing  bank  of  the  United 
States,  is  dwelt  upon  in  the  message  as  a  serious  objection  to  the  re- 
charter.  But  this  interest  is  the  result  of  the  assignable  nature  of  the 
stock ;  and  if  the  objection  be  well  founded,  it  applies  to  government  stock, 
to  the  stock  in  local  banks,  in  canal  and  other  companies,  created  for  in- 
ternal improvements,  and  every  species  of  money  or  movables  in  which 
foreigners  may  acquire  an  interest.  The  assignable  character  of  the  stock 
is  a  quality  conferred  not  for  the  benefit  of  foreigners,  but  for  that  of  our 
own  citizens.  And  the  fact  of  its  being  transferred  to  them  is  the  effect  of 
the  balance  of  trade  being  against  us — an  evil,  if  it  be  one,  which  the 
American  system  will  correct.  All  governments  wanting  capital  resort  to 
foreign  nations  possessing  it  in  superabundance,  to  obtain  it.  Sometimes 
the  resort  is  even  made  by  one  to  another  belligerent  nation.  Duriug  our 
revolutionary  war  we  obtained  foreign  capital  (Dutch  and  French)  to  aid 
us.  During  the  late  war  American  stock  was  sent  to  Europe  to  sell ;  and 
if  I  am  not  misinformed,  to  Liverpool.  The  question  does  not  depend 
upon  the  place  whence  the  capital  is  obtained,  but  the  advantageous  use 
of  it.  The  confidence  of  foreigners  in  our  stocks  is  a  proof  of  the  solidity 
of  our  credit.     Foreigners  have  no  voice  in  the  administration  of  this 

34 


530  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

bank  ;  and  if  they  buy  its  stock,  they  are  obliged  to  submit  to  citizens  of 
the  United  States  to  manage  it.  The  senator  from  Tennessee  (Mr.  White), 
asks  what  would  have  been  the  condition  of  this  couutry  if,  during  the  late 
war,  this  bank  had  existed,  with  such  an  interest  in  it  as  foreigners  now 
hold  ?  I  will  tell  him.  We  should  have  avoided  many  of  the  disasters  of 
that  war,  perhaps  those  of  Detroit  and  at  this  place.  The  government  would 
have  possessed  ample  means  for  its  vigorous  prosecution  ;  and  the  interest 
of  foreigners,  British  subjects  especially,  would  have  operated  upon  them, 
not  upon  us.  Will  it  not  be  a  serious  evil  to  be  obliged  to  remit  in  specie 
to  foreigners  the  eight  millions  which  they  now  have  in  this  bank,  instead 
of  retaining  that  capital  within  the  country  to  stimulate  its  industry  and 
enterprise  ? 

The  president  assigns  in  his  message  a  conspicuous  place  to  the  alleged 
injurious  operation  of  the  bank  on  the  interests  of  the  western  people. 
They  ought  to  be  much  indebted  to  him  for  his  kindness  manifested  to- 
ward them ;  although  I  think  they  have  much  reason  to  deprecate  it.  The 
people  of  all  the  West  owe  to  this  bank  about  thirty  millions,  which  have 
been  borowed  from  it;  and  the  president  thinks  that  the  payments  for  the 
interest,  and  other  facilities  which  they  derive  from  the  operation  of  the 
bank,  are  so  onerous  as  to  produce  "  a  drain  of  their  currency,  which  no 
country  can  bear  without  inconvenience  and  occasional  distress."  His 
remedy  is  to  compel  them  to  pay  the  whole  of  the  debt  which  they  have 
contracted  in  a  period  short  of  four  years.  Now,  Mr.  President,  if  they  can 
not  pay  the  interest  without  distress,  how  are  they  to  pay  the  principal  ? 
If  they  can  not  pay  a  part,  how  are  they  to  pay  the  whole  ?  Whether  the 
payment  of  the  interest  be  or  be  not  a  burden  to  them,  is  a  question  for 
themselves  to  decide,  respecting  which  they  might  be  disposed  to  dispense 
with  the  kindness  of  the  president.  If,  instead  of  borrowing  thirty  millions 
from  the  bank,  they  had  borrowed  a  like  sum  from  a  Girard,  John  Jacob 
Astor,  or  any  other  banker,  what  would  they  think  of  one  who  would  come 
to  them  and  say,  "  Gentlemen  of  the  West,  it  will  ruin  you  to  pay  the 
interest  on  that  debt,  and  therefore  I  will  oblige  you  to  pay  the  whole  of 
the  principal  in  less  than  four  years."  Would  they  not  reply,  "  We  know 
what  we  are  about ;  mind  your  own  business  ;  we  are  satisfied  that  in  ours 
we  can  make  not  only  the  interest  on  what  we  loan,  but  a  fair  profit  be- 
sides." 

A  great  mistake  exists  about  the  western  operation  of  the  bank.  It  is 
not  the  bank,  but  the  business,  the  commerce  of  the  West,  and  the  opera- 
tions of  government,  that  occasion  the  transfer,  annually,  of  money  from 
the  West  to  the  Atlantic  States.  What  is  the  actual  course  of  things  ? 
The  business  and  commerce  of  the  West  are  carried  on  with  New  Orleans, 
with  the  southern,  and  south-western  States,  and  with  the  Atlantic  cities. 
We  transport  our  dead  or  inanimate  produce  to  New  Orleans,  and  receive 
in  return  checks  or  drafts  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States  at  a  premium 
of  a  half  per  centum.    We  send  by  our  drovers  our  live  stock  to  the  South 


ON   PRESIDENT   JACKSON'S   VETO   OF   THE   BANK   BILL.       531 

and  South-west,  and  receive  similar  checks  in  return.  With  these  drafts 
or  checks  our  merchants  proceed  to  the  Atlantic  cities,  and  purchase  do- 
mestic or  foreign  goods  for  western  consumption.  The  lead  and  fur  trade 
of  Missouri  and  Illinois  is  also  carried  on  principally  through  the  bank  of 
the  United  States.  The  government  also  transfers  to  places  where  it  is 
wanted,  through  that  bank,  the  sums  accumulated  at  the  different  land- 
offices,  for  purchases  of  the  public  lands. 

Now  all  these  varied  operations  must  go  on ;  all  these  remittances  must 
be  made,  bank  of  the  United  States  or  no  bank.  The  bauk  does  not 
create,  but  facilitate  them.  The  bank  is  a  mere  vehicle ;  just  as  much  so 
as  the  steamboat  is  the  vehicle  which  transports  our  produce  to  the  great 
mart  of  New  Orleans,  and  not  the  grower  of  that  produce.  It  is  to  con- 
found cause  and  effect,  to  attribute  to  the  bank  the  transfer  of  money  from 
the  West  to  the  East.  Annihilate  the  bank  to-morrow,  and  similar  trans- 
fers of  capital,  the  same  description  of  pecuniary  operations,  must  be  con- 
tinued ;  not  so  well,  it  is  true,  but  performed  they  must  be,  ill  or  well, 
under  any  state  of  circumstances. 

The  true  questions  are,  how  are  they  now  performed,  how  were  they 
conducted  prior  to  the  existence  of  the  bank  ?  how  would  they  be  after  it 
ceased  ?  I  can  tell  you  what  was  our  condition  before  the  bank  was  es- 
tablished; and,  as  I  reason  from  the  past  to  future  experience,  under 
analogous  circumstances,  I  can  venture  to  predict  what  it  will  probably  be 
without  the  bank. 

Before  the  establishment  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States,  the  exchange 
business  of  the  West  was  carried  on  by  a  premium,  which  was  generally 
paid  on  all  remittances  to  the  East  of  two  and  a  half  per  centum.  The 
aggregate  amount  of  all  remittances,  throughout  the  whole  circle  of  the 
year,  was  very  great,  and  instead  of  the  sum  then  paid,  we  now  pay  half 
per  centum,  or  nothing,  if  notes  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States  be  used. 
Prior  to  the  bank,  we  were  without  the  capital  of  the  thirty  millions  which 
that  institution  now  supplies,  stimulating  our  industry  and  invigorating  our 
enterprise.  In  Kentucky,  we  have  no  specie-paying  bank,  scarcely  any 
currency  other  than  that  of  paper  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States  and  its 
branches. 

How  is  the  West  to  pay  this  enormous  debt  of  thirty  millions  of  dollars  ? 
It  is  impossible.  It  can  not  be  done.  General  distress,  certain,  wide- 
spread, inevitable  ruin,  must  be  the  consequences  of  an  attempt  to  enforce 
the  payment.  Depression  in  the  value  of  all  property,  sheriffs'  sales  and 
sacrifices,  bankruptcy,  must  necessarily  ensue,  and,  with  them,  relief  laws, 
paper  money,  a  prostration  of  the  courts  of  justice,  evils  from  which  we 
have  just  emerged,  must  again,  with  all  their  train  of  afflictions,  revisit  our 
country.  But  it  is  argued  by  the  gentleman  from  Tennessee  (Mr.  White), 
that  similar  predictions  were  made,  without  being  realized,  from  the  down- 
fall of  the  old  bank  of  the  United  States.  It  is,  however,  to  be  recollected 
that  the  old  bank  did  not  possess  one  third  of  the  capital  of  the  present; 


532  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

that  it  had  but  one  office  west  of  the  mountains,  while  the  present  has 
nine ;  and  that  it  had  little  or  no  debt  due  to  it  in  that  quarter,  while  the 
present  bank  has  thirty  millions.  The  war,  too,  which  shortly  followed  the 
downfall  of  the  old  bank,  and  the  suspension  of  specie  payments,  which 
soon  followed  the  war,  prevented  the  injury  apprehended  from  the  discon- 
tinuance of  the  old  bank. 

The  same  gentleman  further  argues  that  the  day  of  payment  must  come ; 
and  he  asks  when,  better  than  now ?  Is  it  to  be  indefinitely  postponed? 
is  the  charter  of  the  present  bank  to  be  perpetual  ?  Why,  Mr.  President, 
all  things — governments,  republics,  empires,  laws,  human  life — doubtless 
are  to  have  an  end ;  but  shall  we  therefore  accelerate  their  termination  ? 
The  West  is  now  young,  wants  capital,  and  its  vast  resources,  needing 
nourishment,  are  daily  developing.  By-and-by,  it  will  accumulate  wealth 
from  its  industry  and  enterprise,  and  possess  its  surplus  capital.  The 
charter  is  not  made  perpetual,  because  it  is  wrong  to  bind  posterity  per- 
petually. At  the  end  of  the  term  limited  for  its  renewal,  posterity  will 
have  the  power  of  determining  for  itself,  whether  the  bank  shall  then  be 
wound  up,  or  prolonged  another  term.  And  that  question  may  be  de- 
cided, as  it  now  ought  to  be,  by  a  consideration  of  the  interests  of  all  parts 
of  the  Union,  the  West  among  the  rest.  Sufficient  for  the  day  is  the  evil 
thereof. 

The  president  tells  us,  that  if  the  executive  had  been  called  upon  to 
furnish  the  project  of  a  bank,  the  duty  would  have  been  cheerfully  per- 
formed;  and  he- states  that  a  bank,  competent  to  all  the  duties  which  may 
be  required  by  the  government,  might  be  so  organized  as  not  to  infringe 
on  our  own  delegated  powers,  or  the  reserved  rights  of  the  States.  The 
president  is  a  co-ordinate  branch  of  the  legislative  department.  As  such, 
bills  which  have  passed  both  Houses  of  Congress  are  presented  to  him  for 
his  approval  or  rejection.  The  idea  of  going  to  the  president  for  the 
project  of  a  law,  is  totally  new  in  the  practice,  and  utterly  contrary  to  the 
theory  of  the  government.  What  should  we  think  of  the  Senate  calling 
upon  the  House,  or  the  House  upon  the  Senate,  for  the  project  of  a  law  ? 

In  France,  the  king  possessed  the  initiative  of  all  laws,  and  none  could 
pass  without  its  having  been  previously  presented  to  one  of  the  chambers 
by  the  crown  through  the  ministers.  Does  the  president  wish  to  introduce 
the  initiative  here  ?  Are  the  powers  of  recommendation,  and  that  of  veto, 
not  sufficient?  Must  all  legislation,  in  its  commencement  and  in  its  term- 
ination concentrate  in  the  president?  When  we  shall  have  reached  that 
state  of  things,  the  election  and  annual  session  of  Congress  will  be  a  useless 
charge  upon  the  people,  and  the  whole  business  of  government  may  be 
economically  conducted  by  ukases  and  decrees. 

Congress  does  sometimes  receive  the  suggestions,  and  opinions  of  the 
heads  of  departments,  as  to  new  laws.  And,  at  the  commencement  of  this 
session,  in  his  annual  report,  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  stated  his  rea- 
sons at  large,  not  merely  in  favor  of  a  bank,  but  in  support  of  the  renewal 


ON  PRESIDENT  JACKSON'S   VETO   OF   THE   BANK   BILL.       533 

of  the  charter  of  the  existing  bank.  Who  could  have  believed  that  that 
responsible  officer  was  communicating  to  Congress  opinions  directly  adverse 
to  those  entertained  by  the  president  himself?  When  before  has  it  hap- 
pened, that  the  head  of  a  department  recommended  the  passage  of  a  law 
which,  being  accordingly  passed  and  presented  to  the  president,  is  subjected 
to  his  veto  ?  What  sort  of  a  bank  it  is,  with  a  project  of  which  the  presi- 
dent would  have  deigned  to  furnish  Congress,  if  they  had  applied  to  him, 
he  has  not  stated.  In  the  absence  of  such  statement,  we  can  only  conjec- 
ture that  it  is  his  famous  treasury  bank,  formerly  recommended  by  him, 
from  which  the  people  have  recoiled  with  the  instinctive  horror  excited  by 
the  approach  of  the  cholera. 

The  message  states,  that  "an  investigation  unwillingly  conceded,  and  so 
restricted  in  time  as  necessarily  to  make  it  incomplete  and  unsatisfactory, 
discloses  enough  to  excite  suspicion  and  alarm."  As  there  is  no  prospect 
of  the  passage  of  this  bill,  the  president's  objections  notwithstanding,  by 
a  constitutional  majority  of  two  thirds,  it  can  never  reach  the  House  of 
Representatives.  The  members  of  that  House,  and  especially  its  distin- 
guished chairman  of  the  committee  of  ways  and  means,  who  reported  the 
bill,  are,  therefore,  cut  off  from  all  opportunity  of  defending  themselves. 
Under  these  circumstances,  allow  me  to  ask  how  the  president  has  ascer- 
tained that  the  investigation  was  unwillingly  conceded  ?  I  have  understood 
directly  the  contrary ;  and  that  the  chairman,  already  referred  to,  as  well 
as  other  members  in  favor  of  the  renewal  of  the  charter,  promptly  con- 
sented to  and  voted  for  the  investigation.  And  wre  all  know  that  those  in 
support  of  the  renewal  could  have  prevented  the  investigation,  aud  that 
they  did  not.  But  suspicion  and  alarm  have  been  excited  !  Suspicion 
and  alarm  !  Against  whom  is  this  suspicion  ?  The  House,  or  the  bank, 
or  both  ? 

Mr.  President,  I  protest  against  the  right  of  any  chief  magistrate  to 
come  into  either  House  of  Congress,  and  scrutinize  the  motives  of  its 
members ;  to  examine  whether  a  measure  has  been  passed  with  prompti- 
tude or  repugnance  ;  and  to  pronounce  upon  the  willingness  or  unwilling- 
ness with  which  it  has  been  adopted  or  rejected.  It  is  an  interference  in 
concerns  which  partake  of  a  domestic  nature.  The  official  and  constitu- 
tional relations  between  the  president  and  the  two  Houses  of  Congress 
subsist  with  them  as  organized  bodies.  His  action  is  confined  to  their 
consummated  proceedings,  aud  does  not  extend  to  measures  in  their  inci- 
pient stages,  during  their  progress  through  the  Houses,  nor  to  the  motives 
by  which  they  are  actuated.  There  are  some  parts  of  this  message  that 
ought  to  excite  deep  alarm  ;  and  that  especially  in  which  the  president  an- 
nounces, that  each  public  officer  may  interpret  the  Constitution  as  he  plea- 
ses. His  lauguage  is,  "  Each  public  officer,  who  takes  an  oath  to  support 
the  Constitution,  swears  that  he  will  support  it  as  he  understands  it,  and 
not  as  it  is  understood  by  others."  *  *  *  "  The  opinion  of  the  judges 
has  no  more  authority  over  Congress  than  the  opinion  of  Congress  has 


534  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

over  the  judges ;  and  on  that  point  the  president  is  independent  of  both." 
Now,  Mr.  President,  I  conceive,  with  great  deference,  that  the  president  has 
mistaken  the  purport  of  the  oath  to  support  the  Constitution  of  the 
United  States.  No  one  swears  to  support  it  as  he  understands  it,  but  to 
support  it  simply  as  it  is  in  truth.  All  men  are  bound  to  obey  the  laws, 
of  which  the  Constitution  is  the  supreme  ;  but  must  they  obey  them  as 
they  are,  or  as  they  understand  them  ?  If  the  obligation  of  obedience  is 
limited  and  controlled  by  the  measure  of  information  ;  in  other  words,  if 
the  party  is  bound  to  obey  the  Constitution  only  as  he  understands  it ; 
what  would  be  the  consequence  ?  The  judge  of  an  inferior  court  would 
disobey  the  mandate  of  a  superior  tribunal,  because  it  Avas  not  in  conform- 
ity to  the  Constitution,  as  he  understands  it  ;  a  custom-house  officer  would 
disobey  a  circular  from  the  treasury  department,  because  contrary  to  the 
Constitution,  as  he  understands  it  ;  an  American  minister  would  disregard 
an  instruction  from  the  president,  communicated  from  the  Department  of 
State,  because  not  agreeable  to  the  Constitution,  as  he  understands  it ;  and 
a  subordinate  officer  in  the  army  or  navy,  would  violate  the  orders  of  his 
superior,  because  they  were  not  in  accordance  with  the  Constitution,  as  he 
understands  it.  We  should  have  nothing  settled,  nothing  stable,  nothing 
fixed.  There  would  be  general  disorder  and  confusion  throughout  every 
branch  of  administration,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  officers — universal 
nullification.  For  what  is  the  doctrine  of  the  president  but  that  of  South 
Carolina  applied  throughout  the  Union  ?  The  president  independent  both 
of  Congress  and  the  Supreme  Court !  only  bound  to  execute  the  laws  of 
the  one  and  the  decisions  of  the  other,  as  far  as  they  conform  to  the  Consti- 
tution of  the  United  States,  as  far  as  he  understands  it !  Then  it  should 
be  the  duty  of  every  president,  on  his  installation  into  office,  to  carefully 
examine  all  the  acts  in  the  statute  book,  approved  by  his  predecessors,  and 
mark  out  those  which  he  was  resolved  not  to  execute,  and  to  which  he 
meant  to  apply  this  new  species  of  veto,  because  they  were  repugnant  to 
the  Constitution  as  he  understands  it.  And,  after  the  expiration  of  every 
term  of  the  Supreme  Court,  he  should  send  for  the  record  of  its  decisions, 
and  discriminate  between  those  which  he  would,  and  those  which  he  would 
not,  execute,  because  they  were  or  were  not  agreeable  to  the  Constitution, 
as  he  understands  it. 

There  is  another  constitutional  doctrine  contained  in  the  message,  which 
is  entirely  new  to  me.  It  asserts  that  "  the  government  of  the  United 
States  have  no  constitutional  power  to  purchase  lands  within  the  States," 
except  "  for  the  erection  of  forts,  magazines,  arsenals,  dockyards,  and  other 
needful  buildings  ;"  and  even  for  these  objects,  only  "  by  the  consent  of  the 
Legislature  of  the  State  in  which  the  same  shall  be."  Now  sir,  I  had  sup- 
posed that  the  right  of  Congress  to  purchase  lands  in  any  State  was  in- 
contestable ;  and,  in  point  of  fact,  it  probably  at  this  moment  owns  land 
in  every  State  of  the  Union,  purchased  for  taxes,  or  as  a  judgment  or  mort- 
gage creditor.     And  there  are  various  acts  of  Congress  which  regulate  the 


ON    PRESIDENT   JACKSON'S   VETO    OF    THE    BANK    BILL.       535 

purchase  and  transfer  of  such  lands.  The  advisers  of  the  president  have 
confounded  the  faculty  of  purchasing  lands  with  the  exercise  of  exclusive 
jurisdiction,  which  is  restricted  by  the  Constitution  to  the  forts  and  other 
buildings  described. 

The  message  presents  some  striking  instances  of  discrepancy.  First,  it 
contests  the  right  to  establish  one  bank,  and  objects  to  the  bill  that  it 
limits  and  restrains  the  power  of  Congress  to  establish  several.  Second,  it 
urges  that  the  bill  does  not  recognize  the  power  of  State  taxation  gen- 
erally ;  and  complains  that  facilities  are  afforded  to  the  exercise  of  that 
power  in  respect  to  the  stock  held  by  individuals.  Third,  it  objects  that 
any  bonus  is  taken,  and  insists  that  not  enough  is  demanded.  And  fourth, 
it  complains  that  foreigners  have  too  much  influence,  and  that  stock  trans- 
ferred loses  the  privilege  of  representation  in  the  elections  of  the  bank, 
which,  if  it  were  retained,  would  give  them  more. 

Mr.  President,  we  are  about  to  close  one  of  the  longest  and  most  ardu- 
ous sessions  of  Congress  under  the  present  Constitution ;  and  when  we  re- 
turn among  our  constituents,  what  account  of  the  operations  of  their 
government  shall  we  be  bound  to  communicate  ?  We  shall  be  compelled 
to  say,  that  the  Supreme  Court  is  paralyzed,  and  the  missionaries  retained 
in  prison  in  contempt  of  its  authority,  and  in  defiance  of  numerous  treaties 
and  laws  of  the  United  States  ;  that  the  executive,  through  the  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury,  sent  to  Congress  a  tariff  bill  which  would  have  destroyed 
numerous  branches  of  our  domestic  industry,  and  to  the  final  destruction 
of  all ;  that  the  veto  has  been  applied  to  the  bank  of  the  United  States, 
our  only  reliance  for  a  sound  and  uniform  currency  ;  that  the  Senate  has 
been  violently  attacked  for  the  exercise  of  a  clear  constitutional  power ; 
that  the  House  of  Representatives  have  been  unnecessarily  assailed  ;  and 
that  the  president  has  promulgated  a  rule  of  action  for  those  who  have 
taken  the  oath  to  support  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  that  must, 
if  there  be  practical  conformity  to  it,  introduce  general  nullification,  and 
end  in  the  absolute  subversion  of  the  government. 


THE    COMPROMISE    TARIFF. 

IN  SENATE,  FEBRUARY  12,   1833. 

[We  find  Mr.  Clay,  in  this  speech,  occupying  one  of  his  emi- 
nently historical  positions — an  epoch  of  his  growing  fame.    When 
he  came  to  Washington,  at  the  opening  of  the  second  session  of 
the  Twenty-second  Congress,    South   Carolina  had  passed  her 
laws   of   nullification,  and  President  Jackson   had   issued   his 
proclamation,  that  the  federal  laws  involved  in  the  controversy 
would  be  executed.     Here  was  a  civil  war  declared,  and  it  was 
not  easy  to  see  how  a  collision  would  be  avoided.     But,  in  this 
state  of  things,  a  new  demonstration  turned  up,  by  the  action 
of  South  Carolina,  to  wit,  that  she  had  not  yet  resolved  on  any 
thing  further  than  a  trial  in  the  courts  of  the  questions  in  dis- 
pute.    Mr.  Clay,  who  had  considered  a  collision  inevitable,  from 
the  previous  aspects  of  the  case,  on  this  new  phase,  instantly 
conceived  a  mode  of  conciliation.     President  Jackson,  finding 
his   precipitate   movement   disapproved   throughout    the   entire 
South,  sought  a  method  of  retreat  by  prompting  his  friends  in 
Congress  to  bring  forward  a  new  tariff  bill,  which  soon  appeared 
in  the  House  of  Representatives  under  the  name  of  Mr.  Ver- 
planck's  bill.     This  bill  was  constructed  so  as  to  break  down  the 
system  of  protection,  and  if  it  had  passed,  would  doubtless  have 
satisfied  South  Carolina.     General  Jackson,  who  was  always, 
when  left  to  his  passions,  running  into  extremes,  and  vd\o  was 
never  a  statesman,  did  not,  perhaps,  see  the  immense  calamity 
which  such  a  measure  as  Mr.  Verplanck's  bill,  consummated, 
would  bring  upon  the  country,  and  willing  to  do  Mr.  Clay  and 
his  friends  a  disservice,  threw  all  the  weight  of  his  influence  on 
the  side  of  the  new  measure.     The  greatest  promptitude  was 
demanded  of  Mr.  Clay  to  anticipate  and  ward  off  this  move- 
ment by  a  measure  of  his  own,  and  with  little  aid  but  his  own 
intuitive  perceptions,  he  brought  forward  in  the  Senate  his  fa- 
mous Compromise  Tariff  of  1833.     It  took  both  Houses  of  Con- 
gress and  the  whole  country  by  surprise,  and  the  first  impression 


ON    THE    COMPROMISE    TARIFF.  537 

was  decidedly  favorable.  It  was  doubtless  one  of  the  baldest 
measures  which  a  statesman  ever  conceived.  To  have  been  sus- 
tained in  it  at  the  time,  by  large  majorities  in  both  Houses  of 
Congress,  and  afterward  to  realize  from  it  the  approbation  and 
gratitude  of  all  parties  of  the  American  people,  North  and  South, 
was  a  signal  triumph  of  genius.  Nothing  but  a  genius  of  an. 
extraordinary  character  could  have  devised  such  a  complicated 
measure  so  suddenly,  and  adapted  it  to  the  exigences  of  the 
case.  The  following  is  the  speech  by  which  he  introduced  it  to 
the  Senate.] 

I  yesterday,  sir,  gave  notice  that  I  should  ask  leave  to  introduce  a  bill 
to  modify  the  various  acts  imposing  duties  on  imports.  I  at  the  same 
time  added,  that  I  should,  with  the  permission  of  the  Senate,  offer  an  ex- 
planation of  the  principle  on  which  that  hill  is  founded.  I  owe,  sir,  an 
apology  to  the  Senate  for  this  course  of  action,  because,  although  strictly 
parliamentary,  it  is,  nevertheless,  out  of  the  usual  practice  of  this  body ; 
hut  it  is  a  course  which  I  trust  that  the  Senate  will  deem  to  he  justified 
by  the  interesting  nature  of  the  subject.  I  rise,  sir,  on  this  occasion,  ac- 
tuated by  no  motives  of  a  private  nature,  by  no  personal  feelings,  and  for 
no  personal  objects ;  but  exclusively  in  obedience  to  a  sense  of  the  duty 
which  I  owe  to  my  country.  I  trust,  therefore,  that  no  one  will  auticipate 
on  my  part  any  ambitious  display  of  such  humble  powers  as  I  may  pos- 
sess. It  is  sincerely  my  purpose  to  present  a  plain,  unadorned,  and  naked 
statement  of  facts  conuected  with  the  measure  which  I  shall  have  the 
honor  to  propose,  and  with  the  condition  of  the  country.  When  I  survey, 
sir,  the  whole  face  of  our  country,  I  behold  all  around  me  evidences  of  the 
most  gratifying  prosperity,  a  prospect  which  would  seem  to  be  without  a 
cloud  upon  it,  were  it  not  that  through  all  parts  of  the  country  there  exist 
great  dissensions  and  unhappy  distinctions,  which,  if  they  can  possibly 
he  relieved  and  reconciled  by  any  broad  scheme  of  legislation  adapted 
to  all  interests,  and  regarding  the  feelings  of  all  sections,  ought  to  be 
quieted  ;  and  leading  to  which  object  any  measure  ought  to  be  well  re- 
ceived. 

In  presenting  the  modification  of  the  tariff  laws,  which  I  am  now  about 
to  submit,  I  have  two  great  objects  in  view.  My  first  object  looks  to  the 
tariff.  I  am  compelled  to  express  the  opinion,  formed  after  the  most  de- 
liberate reflection,  and  on  full  survey  of  the  whole  country,  that,  whether 
rightfully  or  wrongfully,  the  tariff  stands  in  imminent  danger.  If  it  should 
he  preserved  during  this  session,  it  must  fall  at  the  next  session.  By  what 
circumstances,  aud  through  what  causes  has  arisen  the  necessity  for  this 
change  in  the  policy  of  our  country,  I  will  not  pi  etend  now  to  elucidate. 
Others  there  are,  who  may  differ  from  the  impressions  which  my  mind  has 
received  upon   this  point.     Owing,  however,  to  a  variety  of  concurrent 


538  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

causes,  the  tariff,  as  it  now  exists,  is  in  imminent  danger,  and  if  the  system 
can  be  preserved  beyond  the  next  session,  it  must  be  by  some  means  not 
now  within  the  reach  of  human  sagacity.  The  fall  of  that  policy,  sir, 
would  be  productive  of  consequences  calamitous  indeed.  When  I  look 
to  the  variety  of  interests  which  are  involved,  to  the  number  of  individuals 
interested,  the  amount  of  capital  invested,  the  value  of  the  buildings  erected, 
and  the  whole  arrangement  of  the  business  for  the  prosecution  of  the  va- 
rious branches  of  the  manufacturing  art,  which  have  sprung  up  under  the 
fostering  care  of  this  government,  I  can  not  contemplate  any  evil  equal  to 
the  sudden  overthrow  of  all  those  interests.  History  can  produce  no  par- 
allel to  the  extent  of  the  mischief  which  would  be  produced  by  such  a 
disaster.  The  repeal  of  the  edict  of  Nantes  itself  was  nothing  in  com- 
parison with  it.  That  condemned  to  exile,  and  brought  to  ruin,  a  great 
number  of  persons.  The  most  respectable  portion  of  the  population  of 
France  was  condemned  to  exile  and  ruin  by  that  measure.  But  in  my 
opinion,  sir,  the  sudden  repeal  of  the  tariff  policy  would  bring  ruin  and 
destruction  on  the  whole  people  of  this  country.  There  is  no  evil,  in  my 
opinion,  equal  to  the  consequences  which  would  result  from  such  a  catas- 
trophe. •„ 

What,  sir,  are  the  complaints  which  unhappily  divide  the  peeple  of  this 
great  country  ?  On  the  one  hand  it  is  said,  by  those  who  are  opposed  to 
the  tariff,  that  it  unjustly  taxes  a  portion  of  the  people,  and  paralyzes  their 
industry  ;  that  it  is  to  be  a  perpetual  operation  ;  that  there  is  to  be  no  end 
to  the  system ;  which,  right  or  wrong,  is  to  be  urged  to  their  inevitable 
ruin.  And  what  is  the  just  complaint,  on  the  other  hand,  of  those  who 
support  the  tariff?  It  is,  that  the  policy  of  the  government  is  vacillating 
and  uncertain,  and  that  there  is  no  stability  in  our  legislation.  Before 
one  set  of  books  is  fairly  opened,  it  becomes  necessary  to  close  them, 
and  to  open  a  new  set.  Before  a  law  can  be  tested  by  experiment,  another 
is  passed.  Before  the  present  law  has  gone  into  operation  ;  before  it  is  yet 
nine  months  old  ;  passed,  as  it  was,  under  circumstances  of  extraordinary 
deliberation,  the  fruit  of  nine  months'  labor;  before  we  know  any  thing  of 
its  experimental  effects,  and  even  before  it  commences  its  operations ;  we 
are  required  to  repeal  it.  On  one  side  we  are  urged  to  repeal  a  system 
which  is  fraught  with  ruin  ;  on  the  other  side,  the  check  now  imposed  on 
enterprise,  and  the  state  of  alarm  in  which  the  public  mind  has  been  thrown, 
render  all  prudent  men  desirous,  looking  ahead  a  little  way,  to  adopt  a 
state  of  things,  on  the  stability  of  which  they  may  have  reason  to  count. 
Such  is  the  state  of  feeling  on  the  one  side  and  on  the  other.  I  am  anx- 
ious to  find  out  some  principle  of  mutual  accommodation,  to  satisfy,  as  far  as 
practicable,  both  parties — to  increase  the  stability  of  our  legislation ;  and 
at  some  distant  day — but  not  too  distant,  when  we  take  into  view  the  mag- 
nitude of  the  interests  ■  lich  are  involved — to  bring  down  the  rate  of 
duties  to  that  revenue  sia  dard,  for  which  our  opponents  have  so  long  con- 
tended.    The   basis   on  which  I  wish  to  found  this  modification  is  one 


J 


ON   THE    COMPROMISE    TARIFF.  539 

of  time  ;  and  the  several  parts  of  the  bill  to  which  I  am  about  to  call 
the  attention  of  the  Senate,  are  founded  on  this  basis.  I  propose  to  give 
protection  to  our  manufactured  articles,  adequate  protection  for  a  length 
of  time,  which,  compared  with  the  length  of  human  life,  is  very  long,  but 
which  is  short,  in  proportion  to  the  legitimate  discretion  of  every  wise 
and  parental  system  of  government ;  securing  the  stability  of  legislation, 
and  allowing  time  for  a  gradual  reduction  on  one  side,  and  on  the  other 
proposing  to  reduce  the  duties  to  that  revenue  standard,  for  which  the 
opponents  of  the  system  have  so  long  contended.  I  will  now  proceed  to 
lay  the  provisions  of  the  bill  before  the  Senate,  with  a  view  to  draw  their 
attention  to  the  true  character  of  the  bill. 

(Mr.  Clay  then  proceeded  to  read  the  first  section  of  the  bill.) 

According  to  this  section,  it  will  be  perceived  that  it  is  proposed  to 
come  down  to  the  revenue  standard  at  the  end  of  little  more  than  nine 
years  and  a  half,  giving  a  protection  to  our  own  manufactures  which  I 
hope  will  be  adequate,  during  the  intermediate  time. 

[Mr.  Clay  here  recapitulated  the  provisions  of  the  sections,  and  showed  by 
various  illustrations  how  they  would  operate  ;  and  then  proceeded  to  read  and 
comment  upon  the  second  section  of  the  bill.] 

It  will  be  recollected,  that  at  the  last  session  of  Congress,  with  a  view  to 
make  a  concession  to  the  southern  section  of  the  country,  low-price!  wool- 
ens, those  supposed  to  enter  into  the  consumption  of  slaves  and  the  poorer 
classes  of  persons,  were  taken  out  of  the  general  class  of  duties  on  woolens, 
and  the  duty  on  them  reduced  to  five  per  centum.  It  will  be  also  recol- 
lected, that  at  that  time  the  gentlemen  from  the  South  said  that  this  con- 
cession was  of  no  consequence,  and  that  they  did  not  care  for  it,  and  I  be- 
lieve that  they  do  not  now  consider  it  of  any  greater  importance.  As, 
therefore,  it  has  failed  of  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  taken  out  of  the 
common  class,  I  think  it  ought  to  be  brought  back  again,  and  placed  by 
the  side  of  the  other  description  of  woolens,  and  made  subject  to  the  same 
reduction  of  duty  as  proposed  by  this  section. 

[Having  next  read  through  the  third  section  of  the  bill,  Mr.  Clay  said :] 

After  the  expiration  of  a  term  of  years,  this  section  lays  down  a  rule  by 
which  the  duties  are  to  be  reduced  to  the  revenue  standard,  which  has 
been  so  long  and  so  earnestly  contended  for.  Until  otherwise  directed, 
and  in  default  of  provision  being  made  for  the  wants  of  the  government  in 
1842,  a  rule  is  thus  provided  for  the  rate  of  duties  thereafter,  Congress 
being,  in  the  mean  time,  authorized  to  adopt  any  other  rule  which  the  ex- 
igences of  the  country,  or  its  financial  condition,  may  require.  That  is  to 
say,  if,  instead  of  the  duty  of  twenty  per  centum  proposed,  fifteen  or  seven- 
teen per  centum  of  duty  is  sufficient,  or  twenty-five  per  centum  should  be 
found  necessary,  to  produce  a  revenue  to  defray  the  expenses  of  an  econom- 


540  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY    CLAY. 

ical  administration  of  the  government,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  either 
of  those  rates,  or  any  other,  from  being  fixed  upon  ;  while  the  rate  of 
twenty  per  centum  is  introduced  to  guard  against  any  failure  on  the  part 
of  Congress  to  make  the  requisite  provision  in  due  season. 

This  section  of  the  bill  contains  also  another  clause,  suggested  by  that 
spirit  of  harmony  and  conciliation  which  I  pray  may  preside  over  the  coun- 
cils of  the  Union  at  this  trying  moment.  It  provides  (what  those  persons 
who  are  engaged  in  manufactures  have  so  long  anxiously  required  for  their 
security)  that  duties  shall  be  paid  in  ready  money ;  and  we  shall  thus  get 
rid  of  the  whole  of  that  credit  system,  into  which  an  inroad  was  made,  in 
regard  to  woolens,  by  the  act  of  the  last  session.  This  section  further  con- 
tains a  proviso  that  nothing  in  any  part  of  this  act  shall  be  construed  to 
interfere  with  the  freest  exercise  of  the  power  of  Congress  to  lay  any 
amount  of  duties,  in  the  event  of  war  breaking  out  between  this  country 
and  any  foreign  power. 

[Mr.  Clay  then  read  the  fourth  section  of  the  bill.] 

One  of  the  considerations  strongly  urging  for  a  reduction  of  the  tariff  at 
this  time  is,  that  the  government  is  likely  to  be  placed  in  a  dilemma  by 
having  an  overflowing  revenue  ;  and  this  apprehension  is  the  ground  of  an 
attempt  totally  to  change  the  protective  policy  of  the  country.  The  section 
which  I  have  read  is  an  effort  to  guard  against  this  evil,  by  relieving  alto- 
gether from  duty  a  portion  of  the  articles  of  import  now  subject  to  it. 
Some  of  these  would,  under  the  present  rate  of  duty  upon  them,  produce  a 
considerable  revenue  ;  the  article  of  silks  alone  would  yield  half  a  million 
of  dollars  per  annum.  If  it  were  possible  to  pacify  present  dissensions,  and 
let  things  take  their  course,  I  believe  that  no  difficulty  need  be  apprehend- 
ed. If  the  bill  which  this  body  passed  at  the  last  session  of  Congress,  and 
has  again  passed  at  this  session,  shall  pass  the  other  House,  and  become  a 
law,  and  the  gradual  reduction  of  duties  should  take  place  which  is  con- 
templated by  the  first  section  of  this  bill,  we  shall  have  settled  two  (if  not 
three)  of  the  great  questions  which  have  agitated  this  country,  that  of  the 
tariff,  of  the  public  lands,  and,  I  will  add,  of  internal  improvement  also. 
For,  if  there  should  still  be  a  surplus  revenue,  that  surplus  might  be  ap- 
plied, until  the  year  1842,  to  the  completion  of  the  works  of  internal  im- 
provement already  commenced ;  and,  after  1842,  a  reliance  for  all  funds 
for  purposes  of  internal  improvement  should  be  placed  upon  the  operation 
of  the  land  bill,  to  which  I  have  already  referred. 

It  is  not  my  object,  in  referring  to  that  measure  in  connection  with  that 
which  I  am  about  to  propose,  to  consider  them  as  united  in  their  fate, 
being  desirous,  partial  as  I  may  be  to  both,  that  each  shall  stand  or  fall 
upon  its  own  intrinsic  merits.  If  this  section  of  the  bill,  adding  to  the 
number  of  fre3  articles,  should  become  law,  along  with  the  reduction  of 
duties  proposed  by  the  first  section  of  the  bill,  it  is  by  no  means  sure  that 
we  shall  have  any  surplus  revenue  at  all.     I  have  been  astonished  indeed 


ON    THE    COMPROMISE    TARIFF.  541 

at  the  process  of  reasoning  by  which  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  has  ar- 
rived at  the  conclusion,  that  we  shall  have  a  surplus  revenue  at  all,  though 
I  admit  that  such  a  conclusion  can  be  arrived  at  in  no  other  way.  But 
what  is  this  process  ?  Duties  of  a  certain  rate  now  exist.  The  amount 
which  they  produce  is  known ;  the  secretary,  proposing  a  reduction  of  the 
rate  of  duty,  supposes  that  the  duties  will  be  reduced  in  proportion  to  the 
amount  of  the  reduction  of  duty.  Now  no  calculation  can  be  more  uncer- 
tain than  that.  Though  perhaps  the  best  that  the  secretary  could  have 
made,  all  is  still  all  uncertainty ;  dependent  upon  the  winds  and  waves,  on 
the  mutations  of  trade,  and  on  the  course  of  commercial  operations.  If 
there  is  any  truth  in  political  economy,  it  can  not  be  that  result  will  agree 
with  the  prediction  ;  for  we  are  instructed  by  all  experience  that  the  con. 
sumption  of  any  article  is  in  proportion  to  the  reduction  of  its  price,  and 
that  in  general  it  may  be  taken  as  a  rule,  that  the  duty  upon  an  article 
forms  a  portion  of  its  price.  I  do  not  mean  to  impute  any  irmproper  design 
to  any  one  ;  but,  if  it  had  been  so  intended,  no  scheme  for  getting  rid  of 
the  tariff  could  have  been  more  artfully  devised  to  effect  its  purposes,  than 
that  which  thus  calculated  the  revenue,  and,  in  addition,  assumed  that  the 
expenditure  of  the  government  every  year  would  be  so  much,  and  so  forth. 
Can  any  one  here  say  what  the  future  expenditure  of  the  government  will 
be  ?  In  this  young,  great,  and  growing  community,  can  Ave  say  what  will 
be  the  expenditure  of  the  government  even  a  year  hence,  much  less  what 
it  will  be  three,  or  four,  or  five  years  hence  ?  Yet  it  has  been  estimated, 
on  assumed  amounts,  founded  on  such  uncertain  data,  both  of  income  and 
expenditure,  that  the  revenue  might  be  reduced  so  many  millions  a  year ! 

I  ask  pardon  for  this  digression,  and  return  to  the  examination  of  ar- 
ticles in  the  fourth  section,  which  are  proposed  to  be  left  free  of  duty. 
The  duties  on  these  articles  now  vary  from  five  to  ten  per  centum  ad  valo- 
rem ;  but  low  as  they  are,  the  aggregate  amount  of  revenue  which  they 
produce  is  considerable.  By  the  bill  of  the  last  session,  the  duties  on 
French  silks  was  fixed  at  five  per  centum,  and  that  on  Chinese  silks  at  ten 
per  centum  ad  volorem.  By  the  bill  now  proposed  the  duty  on  French 
silks  is  proposed  to  be  repealed,  leaving  the  other  untouched.  I  will 
frankly  state  why  I  made  this  distinction.  It  has  been  a  subject  of  anxious 
desire  with  me  to  see  our  commerce  with  France  increased.  France,  though, 
not  so  large  a  customer  in  the  great  staples  of  our  country  as  Great  Britain, 
is  a  great  growing  customer.  I  have  been  much  struck  with  a  fact  going  to 
prove  this,  which  accidentally  came  to  my  knowledge  the  other  day  ;  which 
is,  that  within  the  short  period  of  fourteen  years,  the  amount  of  consump- 
tion in  France  of  the  great  southern  staple  of  cotton  has  been  tripled. 
Again,  it  is  understood  that  the  French  silks  of  the  lower  grades  of  quality 
can  not  sustain  a  competition  with  the  Chinese  without  some  discrimination 
of  this  sort.  I  have  understood,  also,  that  the  duty  imposed  upon  this  ar- 
ticle at  the  last  session  has  been  very  much  complained  of  on  the  part  of 
France  ;  and,  considering  all  the  circumstances  connected  with  the  relations 


542  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

between  the  two  governments,  it  appears  to  me  to  be  desirable  to  make 
this  discrimination  in  favor  of  the  French  product.  If  the  Senate  should 
think  differently,  I  shall  be  content.  If,  indeed,  they  should  think  proper 
to  strike  out  this  section  altogether,  I  shall  cheerfully  submit  to  their  de- 
cision. 

[After  reading  the  fifth  and  sixth  sections,  Mr.  Clay  said :] 

I  will  now  take  a  few  of  some  of  the  objections  which  will  be  made  to 
the  bill.  It  may  be  said  that  the  act  is  prospective,  that  it  binds  our  suc- 
cessors, and  that  we  have  no  power  thus  to  bind  them.  It  is  true  that  the 
act  is  prospective,  and  so  is  almost  every  act  which  we  ever  passed,  but  we 
can  repeal  it  the  next  clay.  It  is  the  established  usage  to  give  all  acts  a 
prospective  operation.  In  every  tariff  there  are  some  provisions  which  go 
into  operation  immediately,  and  others  at  a  future  time.  Each  Congress 
legislate  according  to  their  own  views  of  propriety  ;  their  act  does  not  bind 
their  successors,  but  creates  a  species  of  public  faith,  which  will  not  rashly 
be  broken.  But  if  this  bill  shall  go  into  operation,  as  I  hope,  even  against 
hope,  that  it  may,  I  doubt  not  that  it  will  be  adhered  to  by  all  parties. 
There  is  but  one  contingency  which  will  render  a  change  necessary,  and 
that  is  the  intervention  of  a  war,  which  is  provided  for  in  the  bill.  The 
hands  of  Congress  are  left  untied  in  this  event,  and  they  will  be  at  liberty 
to  resort  to  any  mode  of  taxation,  which  they  may  propose.  But  if  we 
suppose  peace  to  continue,  there  will  be  no  motive  for  disturbing  the  ar- 
rangement, but  on  the  contrary,  every  motive  to  carry  it  into  effect.  In 
the  next  place,  it  will  be  objected  to  the  bill,  by  the  friends  of  the  protec- 
tive policy,  of  whom  I  hold  myself  to  be  one,  for  my  mind  is  immutably 
fixed  in  favor  of  that  policy,  that  it  abandons  the  power  of  protection. 
But  I  contend,  in  the  first  place,  that  a  suspension  of  the  exercise  of  the 
power  is  not  an  abandonment  of  it ;  for  the  power  is  in  the  Constitution 
according  to  our  theory,  was  put  there  by  its  framers,  and  can  only  be  dis- 
lodged by  the  people.  After  the  year  1842,  the  bill  provides  that  the  power 
shall  be  exercised  in  a  certain  mode.  There  are  four  modes  by  which  the 
industry  of  the  country  can  be  protected. 

First,  the  absolute  prohibition  of  rival  foreign  articles  that  are  totally 
unattempted  by  the  bill ;  but  it  is  competent  to  the  wisdom  of  the  govern- 
ment to  exert  the  power  whenever  they  wish.  Second,  the  imposition  of 
duties  in  such  a  manner  as  to  have  no  reference  to  any  object  but  revenue. 
When  we  had  a  large  public  debt  in  1816,  the  duties  yielded  thirty- 
seven  millions,  and  paid  so  much  more  of  the  debt,  and  subsequently  they 
yielded  but  eight  or  ten  millions,  and  paid  so  much  less  of  the  debt.  Some- 
times we  have  to  trench  on  the  sinking-fund.  Now  we  have  no  public 
debt  to  absorb  the  surplus  revenue,  and  no  motive  for  continuing  the  duties. 
No  man  can  look  at  the  condition  of  the  country,  and  say  that  we  can 
carry  on  this  system  with  accumulating  revenue,  and  no  practical  way  of 
expending  it.     The  third  mode  Avas  attempted  last  session,  in  a  resolution 


V 


ON    THE    COMPROMISE    TARIFF.  543 

which  I  had  the  honor  to  submit  last  year,  and  which  in  fact  ultimately 
formed  the  basis  of  the  act  which  finally  passed  both  Houses.     This  was  to 
raise  as  much  revenue  as  was  wanted  for  the  use  of  the  government,  and 
no  more,  but  to  raise  it  from  the  protected  and  not  from  the  unprotected 
articles.     I  will  say,  that  I  regret  most  deeply  that  the  greater  part  of  the 
country  will  not  suffer  this  principle  to  prevail.     It  ought  to  prevail ;  and 
the  day,  in  my  opinion,  will  come,  when  it  will  be  adopted  as  the  perma- 
nent policy  of  the  country.     Shall  we  legislate  for  our  own  wants  or  that 
of  a  foreign  country  ?     To  protect  our  own  interests  in  opposition  to  for- 
eign legislation  was  the  basis  of  this  system.     The  fourth  mode  in  which 
protection  can  be  afforded  to  domestic  industry,  is  to  admit  free  of  duty 
every  article  which  aided  the  operations  of  the  manufacturers.     These  are 
the  four  modes  for  protecting  our  industry ;  and  to  those  who  say  the  bill 
abandons  the  power  of  protection,  I  reply,  that  it  does  not  touch  that  pow- 
er ;  and  that  the  fourth  mode,  so  far  from  being  abandoned,  is  extended 
and  upheld  by  the  bill.     The  most  that  can  be  objected  to  the  bill  by\ 
those  with  whom  I  co-operate  to  support  the  protective  system,  is,  that,  in  j 
consideration  of  nine  and  a  half  years  of  peace,  certainty,  and  stability,  the 
manufacturers  relinquished  some  advantages  which  they  now  enjoy.     What 
is  the  principle  which  has  always  been  contended  for  in  this  and  in  the 
other  House  ?     After  the  accumulation  of  capital  and  skill,  the  manufac- 
turers will  stand  alone,  unaided  by  the  government,  in  competition  with  the 
imported  articles  from  any  quarter.     Now  give  us  time  ;  cease  all  fluctua- 
tions and  agitations,  for  nine  years,  and  the  manufacturers  in  every  branch 
will  sustain  themselves  against  foreign  competition.     If  we  can  see  our 
way  clearly  for  nine  years  to  come,  wre  can  safely  leave  to  posterity  to  pro- 
vide for  the  rest.     If  the  tariff  be  overthrown,  as  may  be  its  fate  next  ses- 
sion, the  country  will  be  plunged  into  extreme  distress  and  agitation.     I 
want  harmony.     I  wish  to  see  the  restoration  of  those  ties  which  have 
carried  us  triumphantly  through  two  wars.     I  delight  not  in  this  perpetual 
turmoil.     Let  us  have  peace,  and  become  once  more  united  as  a  band  of 
brothers. 

It  may  be  said  that  the  farming  interest  can  not  subsist  under  a  twenty 
per  centum  ad  valorem  duty,  My  reply  is,  "  Sufficient  for  the  day  is  the 
evil  thereof."  I  will  leave  it  to  the  clay  when  the  reduction  takes  effect 
to  settle  the  question.  When  the  reduction  takes  place,  and  the  farmer 
can  not  live  under  it,  what  will  he  do  ?  I  will  tell  you  what  he  ought  to 
do.  He  ought  to  try  it — make  a  fair  experiment  of  it — and  if  he  can  not 
live  under  it,  let  him  come  here  and  say  that  he  is  bankrupt  and  ruined. 
If  then  nothing  can  be  done  to  relieve  him,  sir,  I  will  not  pronounce  the 
words,  for  I  will  believe  that  something  will  be  done,  and  that  relief  will 
be  afforded,  without  hazarding  the  peace  and  integrity  of  the  Union.  The 
confederacy  is  an  excellent  contrivauce.  but  it  must  be  managed  with  deli- 
cacy and  skill.  There  are  an  infinite  variety  of  prejudices  and  local  in 
terests  to  be  regarded,  but  all  should  be  made  to  yield  to  the  Union. 


544  SPEECHES  OF   HENKY    CLAY. 

If  the  system  proposed  can  not  be  continued,  let  us  try  some  intermediate 
system  before  we  think  of  any  other  dreadful  alternative.  Sir,  it  will  be 
said,  on  the  other  hand — for  the  objections  are  made  by  the  friends  of 
protection,  principally — that  the  time  is  too  long ;  that  the  intermediate 
reductions  are  too  inconsiderable,  and  that  there  is  no  guaranty  that,  at  the 
end  of  the  time  stipulated,  the  reduction  proposed  would  be  allowed  to  take 
effect.  In  the  first  place,  should  be  recollected  the  diversified  interests  of 
the  country ;  the  measures  of  the  government  which  preceded  the  estab- 
lishment of  manufactures;  the  public  faith  in  some  degree  pledged  for 
their  security  ;  and  the  ruin  in  which  rash  and  hasty  legislation  would  in-f 
volve  them.  I  will  not  dispute  about  terms.  It  would  not,  in  a  court  of 
justice,  be  maintained  that  the  public  faith  is  pledged  for  the  protection 
of  manufactures;  but  there  are  other  pledges  which  men  of  honor  are 
bound  by  besides  those  of  which  the  law  can  take  cognizance. 

If  we  excite,  in  our  neighbor,  a  reasonable  expectation  which  induces 
him  to  take  a  particular  course  of  business,  we  are  in  honor  bound  to  re- 
deem the  pledge  thus  tacitly  given.  Can  any  man  doubt  that  a  large  portion 
of  our  citizens  believed  that  the  system  would  be  permanent  ?  The  whole 
country  expected  it.  The  security  against  any  change  of  the  system  pro- 
posed by  the  bill,  is  in  the  character  of  the  bill,  as  a  compromise  between 
two  conflicting  parties.  If  the  bill  should  be  taken  by  common  consent, 
as  we  hope  it  will  be,  the  history  of  the  re  venue  will  be  a  guaranty  of  its 
permanence.  The  circumstances  under  which  it  was  passed  will  be  known 
and  recorded  ;  and  no  one  will  disturb  a  system  which  was  adopted  with  a 
view  to  give  peace  and  tranquillity  to  the  country. 

The  descending  gradations  by  which  I  propose  to  arrive  at  the  minimum 
of  duties,  must  be  gradual.  I  never  would  consent  to  any  precipitate  op- 
eration to  bring  distress  and  ruin  on  the  community. 

Now,  viewing  it  in  this  light,  it  appears  that  there  are  eight  years  and 
a  half,  and  nine  years  and  a  half,  taking  the  ultimate  time,  which  would 
be  an  efficient  protection,  the  remaining  duties  will  be  withdrawn  by  a 
biennial  reduction.  The  protective  principle  must  be  said  to  be,  in  some 
measure,  relinquished  at  the  end  of  eight  years  and  a  half.  This  period 
can  not  appear  unreasonable,  and  I  think  that  no  member  of  the  Senate, 
or  any  portion  of  the  country,  ought  to  make  the  slightest  objection.  It 
now  remains  for  me  to  consider  the  other  objection — the  want  of  guaranty 
to  there  being  an  ulterior  continuance  of  the  duties  imposed  by  the  bill,  on 
the  expiration  of  the  term  which  it  prescribes.  The  best  guaranty  will  be 
found  in  the  circumstances  under  wdiich  the  measure  would  be  passed.  If 
it  passes  by  common  consent ;  if  it  is  passed  with  the  assent  of  a  portion — 
a  considerable  portion  of  those  who  have  directly  hitherto  supported  this 
system,  and  by  a  considerable  portion  of  those  who  opposed  it — if  they 
declare  their  satisfaction  with  the  measure,  I  have  no  doubt  the  rate  of 
duties  guarantied  will  be  continued  after  the  expiration  of  the  term,  if  the 
country  contiuues  at  peace.     And,  at  the  end  of  the  term,  when  the  ex- 


ON   THE    COMPROMISE    TARIFF.  545 

periment  will  have  been  made  of  the  efficiency  of  the  mode  of  protection 
fixed  by  the  bill,  while  the  constitutional  question  has  been  suffered  to  lie 
dormaut,  if  war  should  render  it  necessary,  protection  might  be  carried  up 
to  prohibition  ;  while  if  the  country  should  remain  at  peace,  and  this 
measure  go  into  full  operation,  the  duties  will  be  gradually  lowered  down 
to  the  revenue  standard,  which  has  been  so  earnestly  wished  for. 

But  suppose  that  I  am  wrong  in  all  these  views,  for  there  are  no  guar- 
anties, in  one  sense  of  the  term,  of  human  infallibility.  Suppose  a  differ- 
ent state  of  things  in  the  South  ;  that  this  Senate,  from  causes  which  I 
shall  not  dwell  upon  now,  but  which  are  obvious  to  every  reflecting  man 
in  this  country — causes  which  have  operated  for  years  past,  and  which 
continue  to  operate — suppose,  for  a  moment,  that  there  should  be  a  major- 
ity in  the  Senate,  in  favor  of  the  southern  views,  and  that  they  should  repeal 
the  whole  system  at  once,  what  guaranty  would  we  have  that  the  repeal- 
ing of  the  law  would  not  destroy  those  great  interests  which  it  is  so  import- 
ant to  preserve  ?  What  guarauty  will  you  have  that  the  thunders  of  thoso 
powerful  manufacturers  will  not  be  directed  against  your  capitol,  because 
of  this  abandonment  of  their  interests,  and  because  you  have  given  them 
no  protection  against  foreign  legislation  ?  Sir,  if  you  carry  your  measure 
of  repeal  without  the  consent,  at  least,  of  a  portion  of  those  who  are 
interested  in  the  preservation  of  manufactures,  you  have  no  security,  no 
guaranty,  no  certainty,  that  any  protection  will  be  continued.  But  if  the 
measure  should  be  carried  by  the  common  consent  of  both  parties,  we  shall 
have  all  security ;  history  will  faithfully  record  the  transaction  ;  narrate 
under  what  circumstances  the  bill  was  passed ;  that  it  was  a  pacifying 
measure  ;  that  it  was  as  oil  poured  from  the  vessel  of  the  Union  to  restore 
peace  and  harmony  to  the  country.  When  all  this  was  known,  what 
Congress,  what  Legislature,  would  mar  the  guaranty  ?  What  man  who 
is  entitled  to  deserve  the  character  of  an  American  statesman,  would  stand 
up  in  his  place  in  either  House  of  Congress,  and  disturb  this  treaty  of  peace 
and  amity  ? 

Sir,  I  will  not  say  that  it  may  not  be  disturbed.  All  that  I  say  is,  that 
here  is  all  the  reasonable  security  that  can  be  desired  by  those  on  the  one 
side  of  the  question,  and  much  more  than  those  on  the  other  would  have 
by  any  unfortunate  concurrence  of  circumstances.  Such  a  repeal  of  the 
whole  system  should  be  brought  about  as  would  be  cheerfully  acquiesced 
in  by  all  parties  in  this  country.  All  parties  may  find  in  this  measure 
some  reasons  for  objection.  And  what  human  measure  is  there  which  is 
free  from  objectionable  qualities?  It  has  been  remarked,  and  justly  re- 
marked, by  the  great  father  of  our  country  himself,  that  if  that  great  work 
which  is  the  charter  of  our  liberties,  and  under  which  we  have  so  long 
flourished,  had  been  submitted,  article  by  article,  to  all  the  different  States 
composing  this  Union,  that  the  whole  would  have  been  rejected  ;  and  yet 
when  the  whole  was  presented  together,  it  was  accepted  as  a  whole.  I 
will  admit  that  my  friends  do  not  get  all  they  could  wish  for ;  and  the 

35 


546  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

gentlemen  on  the  other  side  do  not  obtain  all  they  might  desire ;  but  both 
will  gain  all  that  in  my  humble  opinion  is  proper  to  be  given  in  the  present 
condition  of  this  country.  It  may  be  true  that  there  will  be  loss  and  gain 
in  this  measure.  But  how  is  this  loss  and  gain  distributed  ?  Among  our 
countrymen.  What  we  lose,  no  foreign  land  gains  ;  and  what  we  gain,  will 
be  no  loss  to  any  foreign  power.  It  is  among  ourselves  the  distribution  takes 
place.  The  distribution  is  founded  on  that  great  principle  of  compromise 
and  concession  which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  our  institutions,  which  gave 
birth  to  the  Constitution  itself,  and  which  has  continued  to  regulate  us  in 
our  onward  march,  and  conducted  the  nation  to  glory  and  renown. 

It  remains  for  me  now  to  touch  another  topic.  Objections  have  been 
made  to  all  legislation  at  this  session  of  Congress,  resulting  from  the  atti- 
tude of  one  of  the  States  of  this  confederacy.  I  confess  that  I  felt  a  veiy 
strong  repugnance  to  any  legislation  at  all  on  this  subject  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  session,  principally  because  I  misconceived  the  purposes,  as  I 
found  from  subsequent  observation,  which  that  State  has  in  view.  Under 
the  influence  of  more  accurate  information,  I  must  say  that  the  aspect  of 
things  since  the  commencement  of  the  session  has,  in  my  opinion,  greatly 
changed.  When  I  came  to  take  my  seat  on  this  floor,  I  had  supposed 
that  a  member  of  this  Union  had  taken  an  attitude  of  defiance  and  hostil- 
ity against  the  authority  of  the  general  government.  I  had  imagined  that 
she  had  arrogantly  required  that  we  should  abandon  at  once  a  system 
which  had  long  been  the  settled  policy  of  this  country.  Supposing  that 
she  had  manifested  this  feeling,  and  taken  up  this  position,  I  had  in  con- 
sequence, felt  a  disposition  to  hurl  defiance  back  again,  and  to  impress 
upon  her  the  necessity  of  the  performance  of  her  duties  as  a  member  of 
this  Union.  But  since  my  arrival  here,  I  find  that  South  Carolina  does 
not  contemplate  force,  for  it  is  denied  and  denounced  by  that  State.  She 
disclaims  it ;  and  asserts  that  she  is  merely  making  an  experiment.  That 
experiment  is  this :  by  a  course  of  State  legislation,  and  by  a  change  in 
her  fundamental  laws,  she  is  endeavoring  by  her  civil  tribunals  to  prevent 
the  general  government  from  carrying  the  laws  of  the  United  States  into 
operation  within  her  limits.  That  she  has  professed  to  be  her  object.  Her 
appeal  is  not  to  arms,  but  to  another  power ;  not  to  the  sword,  but  to  the 
law.  I  must  say,  and  I  will  say  it  with  no  intention  of  disparaging  that 
State,  or  any  other  of  the  States,  it  is  a  feeling  unworthy  of  her.  As  the 
purpose  of  South  Carolina  is  not  that  of  force,  this  at  once  disarms,  divests 
legislation  of  one  principal  objection,  which,  it  appears  to  me,  existed  against 
it  at  the  commencement  of  this  session.  Her  purposes  are  all  of  a  civil 
nature.  She  thinks  she  can  oust  the  United  States  from  her  limits  ;  and 
unquestionably  she  has  taken  good  care  to  prepare  her  judges  beforehand 
by  swearing  them  to  decide  in  her  favor.  If  we  submitted  to  her,  we 
should  thus  stand  but  a  poor  chance  of  obtaining  justice.  She  disclaims 
any  intention  of  resorting  to  force  unless  we  should  find  it  indispensable 
to  execute  the  laws  of  the  Union  by  applying  force  to  her.     It  seems  to 


ON   THE   COMPROMISE   TARIFF.  547 

me  the  aspect  of  the  attitude  of  South  Carolina  has  changed  ;  or  rather, 
the  new  liffht  which  I  have  obtained,  enables  me  to  see  her  in  a  different 
attitude  ;  and  I  have  not  truly  understood  her  until  she  passed  her  laws, 
by  which  it  was  intended  to  carry  her  ordinance  into  effect.  Now,  I 
venture  to  predict  that  the  State  to  which  I  have  referred  must  ultimately 
fail  in  her  attempt.  I  disclaim  any  intention  of  saying  any  thing  to  the 
disparagement  of  that  State.  Far  from  it.  I  think  that  she  has  been  rash, 
intemperate,  and  greatly  in  error ;  and,  to  use  the  language  of  one  of  her 
own  writers,  made  up  an  issue  unworthy  of  her.  From  one  end  to  the 
other  of  this  continent,  by  acclamation,  as  it  were,  nullification  has  been 
put  down,  and  put  down  in  a  manner  more  effectually  than  by  a  thousand 
wars  or  a  thousand  armies — by  the  irresistible  force,  by  the  mighty  influ- 
ence of  public  opinion.  Not  a  voice  beyond  the  single  State  of  South 
Carolina  has  been  heard  in  favor  of  the  principle  of  nullification,  which 
she  has  asserted  by  her  own  ordinance  ;  and  I  will  say,  that  she  must  fail 
in  her  lawsuit.  I  will  express  two  opinions  ;  the  first  of  which  is,  that  it 
is  not  possible  for  the  ingenuity  of  man  to  devise  a  system  of  State  legis- 
lation to  defeat  the  execution  of  the  laws  of  the  United  States,  which  can 
not  be  countervailed  by  federal  legislation. 

A  State  might  take  it  upon  herself  to  throw  obstructions  in  the  way  of 
the  execution  of  the  laws  of  the  federal  government ;  but  federal  legisla- 
tion can  follow  at  her  heels  quickly,  and  successfully  counteract  the  course 
of  State  legislation.  The  framers  of  the  Constitution  foresaw  this,  and  the 
Constitution  has  guarded  against  it.  What  has  it  said  ?  It  is  declared, 
in  the  clause  enumerating  the  powers  of  this  government,  that  Congress 
shall  have  all  power  to  cany  into  effect  all  the  powers  granted  by  the 
Constitution,  in  any  branch  of  the  government  under  the  sweeping  clause ; 
for  they  have  not  specified  contingences,  because  they  could  not  see  what 
was  to  happen  ;  but  whatever  powers  were  necessary,  all,  all  are  given  to 
this  government  by  the  fundamental  law,  necessary  to  carry  into  effect 
those  powers  which  are  vested  by  that  Constitution  in  the  federal  govern- 
ment. That  is  one  reason.  The  other  is,  that  it  is  not  possible  for  any 
State,  provided  this  government  is  administered  with  prudence  and  pro- 
priety, so  to  shape  its  laws  as  to  throw  upon  the  general  government  the 
responsibility  of  first  resorting  to  the  employment  of  force ;  but,  if  force 
at  all  is  employed,  it  must  be  by  State  legislation,  and  not  federal  legisla- 
tion ;  and  the  responsibility  of  employing  that  force  must  rest  with,  and 
attach  to,  the  State  itself. 

T  shall  not  go  into  the  details  of  th'is  bill.  I  merelythrow  out  these  sen- 
timents for  the  purpose  of  show  you,  that  South  Carolina,  having  declared 
her  purpose  to  be  this,  to  make  an  experiment  whether,  by  a  course  of 
legislation,  in  a  conventional  form,  or  a  lemslative  form  of  enactment,  she 
can  defeat  the  execution  of  certain  laws  of  the  United  States,  I  for  one, 
will  express  my  opinion,  that  I  believe  it  is  utterly  impracticable,  whatever 
course  of  legislation  she  may  choose  to  adopt,  for  her  to  succeed.     I  am 


548  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

ready,  for  one,  to  give  the  tribunals  and  the  executive  of  the  country, 
whether  that  executive  has  or  has  not  my  confidence,  the  necessary  meas- 
ures of  power  and  authority  to  execute  the  laws  of  the  Union.  But  I 
would  not  go  a  hair's  breadth  further  than  what  was  necessary  for  those 
purposes.  Up  to  that  point  I  would  go,  and  cheerfully  go  ;  for  it  is  my 
sworn  duty,  as  I  regard  it,  to  go  to  that  point. 

Again  ;  taking  this  view  of  the  subject,  South  Carolina  is  doing  nothing 
more,  except  that  she  is  doing  it  with  more  rashness,  than  some  other 
States  have  done — that  respectable  State,  Ohio,  and,  if  I  am  not  mistaken, 
the  State  of  Virginia  also.  An  opinion  prevailed  some  years  ago,  that  if 
you  put  the  laws  of  a  State  into  a  penal  form,  you  could  oust  federal  juris- 
diction out  of  the  limits  of  that  State,  because  the  State  tribunals  had  an 
exclusive  jurisdiction  over  penalties  and  crime,  and  it  was  inferred  that  no 
federal  court  could  wrest  the  authority  from  them.  According  to  that 
principle,  the  State  of  Ohio  passed  the  laws  taxing  the  branch  of  the 
United  States  bank,  and  high  penalties  were  to  be  enforced  against  every 
person  who  should  attempt  to  defeat  her  taxation.  The  question  was  tried. 
It  happened  to  be  my  lot  to  be  counsel  at  law  to  bring  the1  suit  against 
the  State,  and  to  maintain  the  federal  authority.  The  trial  took  place 
in  the  State  of  Ohio;  and  it  is  one  of  the  many  circumstances  which 
redounds  to  the  honor  of  that  patriotic  State,  that  she  submitted  to  the 
federal  force.  I  went  to  the  office  of  the  public  treasury  myself,  to  which 
was  taken  the  money  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States,  it  having  remained 
there  in  sequestration  until  it  was  peaceably  rendered,  in  obedience  to  the 
decision  of  the  court,  without  any  appeal  to  arms.  In  a  building  which  I 
had  to  pass  in  order  to  reach  the  treasury,  I  saw  the  most  brilliant  display 
of  arms  and  musketry  that  I  ever  saw  in  my  life  ;  but  not  one  was  raised, 
or  threatened  to  be  raised,  against  the  due  execution  of  the  laws  of  the 
United  States,  when  they  were  then  enforced.  In  Virginia  (but  I  am  not 
sure  that  I  am  correct  in  the  history  of  it,)  there  was  a  case  of  this  kind. 
Persons  were  liable  to  penalties  for  selling  lottery  tickets.  It  was  contended 
that  the  State  tribunals  had  an  exclusive  jurisdiction  over  the  subject. 
The  case  was  brought  before  the  Supreme  Court ;  the  parties  were  a  Mr. 
Myers  and  somebody  else,  and  it  decided,  as  it  must  always  decide,  no 
matter  what  obstruction,  no  matter  what  the  State  law  may  be,  the  consti- 
tutional laws  of  the  United  States  must  follow  and  defeat  it,  in  its  attempt 
to  arrest  the  federal  arm  in  the  exercise  of  its  lawful  authority.  South 
Carolina  has  attempted,  and,  I  repeat,  it  in  a  much  more  offensive  way  at- 
tempted, to  defeat  the  execution  of  the  laws  of  the  United  States.  But  it 
6eems,  that,  under  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  she  has,  for  the  pres- 
ent, determined  to  stop  here,  in  order  that,  by  our  legislation,  we  may 
prevent  the  necessity  of  her  advancing  any  further.  But  there  are  other 
reasons  for  the  expediency  of  legislation  at  this  time.  Although  I  came 
here  impressed  with  a  different  opinion,  my  mind  has  now  become  recon- 
ciled. 


ON   THE   COMPEOMISE   TARIFF.  549 

The  memorable  1st  of  February  is  past.      I  confess  I  did  feel  an  uncon- 
querable repugnance  to  legislation  until  that  day  should  have  passed,  be- 
cause of  the  consequences  that  were  to  ensue.     I  hoped  that  the  day  would 
go  over  well.     I  feel,  and  I  think  that  we  must  all  confess,  we  breathe  a 
freer  air  than  when  the  restraint  was  upon  us.     But  this  is  not  the  only 
consideration.      South  Carolina  has  practically  postponed  her  ordinance, 
instead  of  letting  it  go  into  effect,  till  ihe  4th  of  March.     Nobody  who  has 
noticed  the  course  of  events,  can  doubt  that  she  will  postpone  it  by  still 
further  legislation,  if  Congress  should  rise  without  any  settlement  of  this 
question.     I  was  going  to  say,  my  life  on  it,  she  will  postpone  it  to  a 
period  subsequent  to  the  4th  of  March.     It  is  in  the  natural  course  of 
events.    South  Carolina  must  perceive  the  embarrassments  of  her  situation. 
She  must  be  desirous — it  is  unnatural  to  suppose  that  she  is  not — to  re- 
main in  the  Union.     What !  a  State  whose  heroes  in  its  gallant  ancestry 
fought  so  many  glorious  battles  along  with  those  of  the  other  States  of 
this  Union — a  State  with  which  this  confederacy  is  linked  by  bonds  of 
such  a  powerful  character  !     I  have  sometimes  fancied  what  would  be  her 
condition  if  she  goes  out  of  this  Union ;    if  her  five  hundred  thousand 
people  should  at  once  be  thrown  upon  their  own  resources.     She  is  out  of 
the  Union.     What  is  the  consequence?     She  is  an  independent  power. 
What  then  does  she  do  ?     She  must  have  armies  and  fleets,  and  an  ex- 
pensive government ;  have  foreign  missions ;  she  must  raise  taxes ;  enact 
this  very  tariff  which  has  driven  her  out  of  the  Union,  in  order  to  enable 
her  to  raise  money,  and  to  sustain  the  attitude  of  an  independent  power. 
If  she  should  have  no  force,  no  navy  to  protect  her,  she  would  be  exposed 
to  piratical  incursions.     Their  neighbor,  St.  Domingo,  might  pour  down  a 
horde  of  pirates  on  her  borders,  and  desolate  her  plantations.     She  must 
have  her  embassies  ;  therefore  must  she  have  a  revenue.     And  let  me  tell 
you,  there  is  another  consequence,  an  inevitable  one  :  she  has  a  certain 
description  of  persons  recognized  as  property  south  of  the  Potomac,  and 
west  of  the  Mississippi,  which  would  be  no  longer  recognized  as  such,  ex- 
cept within  their  own  limits.     This  species  of  property  would  sink  to  one 
half  of  its  present  value,  for  it  is  Louisiana  and  the  south-western  States 
which  are  her  great  market. 

But  I  will  not  dwell  on  this  topic  any  longer.  I  say  it  is  utterly  impos- 
sible that  South  Carolina  ever  desired,  for  a  moment,  to  become  a  separate 
and  independent  State.  If  the  existence  of  the  ordinance,  while  an  act  of 
Congress  is  pending,  is  to  be  considered  as  a  motive  for  not  passing  that 
law,  why,  this  would  be  found  to  be  a  sufficient  reason  for  preventing 
the  passage  of  any  laws.  South  Carolina,  by  keeping  the  shadow  of  an 
ordinance  ever  before  us,  as  she  has  it  in  her  power  to  postpone  it  from 
time  to  time,  would  defeat  our  legislation  for  ever.  I  would  repeat,  that 
under  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  the  condition  of  South  Carolina  is 
only  one  of  the  elements  of  a  combination,  the  whole  of  which,  together, 
constitutes  a  motive  of  action  which  renders  it  expedient  to  resort,  during 


550  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

the  present  session  of  Congress,  to  some  measure  in  order  to  quiet  and 
tranquilize  the  country. 

If  there  be  any  who  want  civil  war,  who  want  to  see  the  blood  of  any 
portion  of  our  countrymen  spilt,  I  am  not  one  of  them  I  wish  to  see  war 
of  no  kind ;  but,  above  all,  I  do  not  desire  to  see  civil  war.  When  war 
begins,  whether  civil  or  foreign,  no  human  sight  is  competent  to  foresee 
when,  or  how,  or  where  it  is  to  terminate.  But  when  a  civil  war  shall  be 
lighted  up  in  the  bosom  of  our  own  happy  land,  and  armies  are  marching, 
and  commanders  are  winning  their  victories,  and  fleets  are  in  motion  on 
our  coast,  tell  me,  if  you  can,  tell  me,  if  any  human  being  can  tell  its  dura- 
tion. God  alone  knows  where  such  a  war  would  end.  In  what  a  state 
will  our  institutions  be  left  ?  In  what  a  state  our  liberties  ?  I  want  no 
war ;  above  all,  no  war  at  home. 

Sir,  I  repeat,  that  I  think  South  Carolina  has  been  rash,  intemperate,  and 
greatly  in  the  wrong ;  but  I  do  not  want  to  disgrace  her,  nor  any  other 
member  of  this  Union.  No  :  I  do  not  desire  to  see  the  luster  of  one  sino-le 
star  dimmed  of  that  glorious  confederacy  which  constitutes  our  political 
sun  ;  still  less  do  I  wish  to  see  it  blotted  out,  and  its  light  obliterated  for- 
ever. Has  not  the  State  of  South  Carolina  been  one  of  the  members  of 
this  Union  in  "  days  that  tried  men's  souls  ?"  Have  not  her  ancestors 
fought  alongside  our  ancestors  ?  If  we  had  to  go  into  a  civil  war  with  such 
a  State,  how  would  it  terminate  ?  "Whenever  it  should  have  terminated, 
what  would  be  her  condition  ?  If  she  should  ever  return  to  the  Union, 
what  would  be  the  condition  of  her  feelings  and  affections  ?  what  the  state 
of  the  heart  of  her  people  ?  She  has  been  with  us  before,  when  her  an- 
cestors mingled  in  the  throng  of  battle,  and  as  I  hope  our  posterity  will 
mingle  with  hers,  for  ages  and  centuries  to  come,  in  the  united  defense  of 
liberty,  and  for  the  honor  and  glory  of  the  Union,  I  do  not  wish  to  see 
her  degraded  or  defaced  as  a  member  of  this  confederacy. 

In  conclusion,  allow  me  to  intreat  and  implore  each  individual  member 
of  this  body  to  bring  into  the  consideration  of  this  measure  which  I  have 
had  the  honor  of  proposing,  the  same  love  of  country  which,  if  I  know 
myself,  has  actuated  me,  and  the  same  desire  of  restoring  harmony  to 
the  Union,  which  has  prompted  this  effort.  If  we  can  forget  for  a  moment 
— but  that  would  be  asking  too  much  of  human  nature — if  we  could  suf- 
fer, for  one  moment,  party  feelings  and  party  causes — and,  as  I  stand  here 
before  my  God,  I  declare  I  have  looked  beyond  those  considerations,  and 
regarded  only  the  vast  interests  of  this  united  people — I  should  hope  that 
under  such  feelings,  and  with  such  dispositions,  we  may  advantageously 
proceed  to  the  consideration  of  this  bill,  and  heal,  before  they  are  yet 
bleeding,  the  wounds  of  our  distracted  country. 


THE  COMPROMISE   TARIFF    (Continued). 

IN  SENATE,  FEBRUARY  25,  1833. 

[Thirteen  days  liad  elapsed  since  the  introduction  of  the 
Compromise  Bill  by  Mr.  Clay,  and  the  measure  had  been  largely 
discussed,  and  with  great  ability.  The  following  speech  is  chiefly 
occupied  in  answers  to  objections  to  the  measure.  Some  senat- 
ors from  the  South,  led  by  Mr.  Forsyth  of  Georgia,  opposed  it, 
and  Mr.  Webster  led  the  opposition  from  the  North.  Mr.  Web- 
ster's chief  objection  was,  that  the  bill  surrendered  the  protect- 
ive policy,  of  which  he  had  become  the  advocate,  though  he 
opposed  the  tariff  of  1824.  He  had  very  properly  changed  with 
the  change  of  interest  in  his  constituents.  If  Mr.  Clay's  Com- 
promise Bill  had  had  more  time  for  consideration,  it  would  prob- 
ably have  been  less  opposed  ;  but  it  was  sprung  on  the  Senate 
so  suddenly,  and  the  necessity  of  a  speedy  decision  was  such — 
only  fifteen  days  from  the  time  of  its  introduction — that  the 
.  time  was  short  to  digest  so  important  a  measure.  To  some 
minds  it  was  then  a  puzzle,  and  long  continued  so,  as  to  its  effect 
on  the  protective  policy.  Mr.  Clay,  however,  was  right,  that  it 
did  not  surrender  that  policy,  and  that  it  retained  all  the  pro- 
tection possible  as  a  compromise  adapted  to  the  exigency.  As 
he  predicted,  the  manufacturers  were  reconciled  to  it,  especially 
as  it  was  to  be  a  reliable  measure  for  a  specific  term  of  years, 
under  which  they  could  adapt  themselves  to  it.  The  existing 
measure  of  protection  was  not  seriously  impaired,  and  the  reduc- 
tion of  protective  duties  was  so  gradual  that  they  hoped  to  be 
able  to  sustain  themselves  under  it.  They  knew  that  they  were 
in  danger  of  losing  all,  and  to  be  saved  in  such  a  crisis  was  a 
most  welcome  boon.  So  sensible  were  the  manufacturers  of  their 
obligations  to  Mr.  Clay  for  this  measure,  that  they  made  a  con- 
tinuous ovation  to  him  on  his  subsequent  tour  through  the 
manufacturing  States.  And  yet  it  was  maintained  by  a  multi- 
tude of  theoretical  cynics,  that  this  tariff  gave  up  protection. 
Practical  men,  however,  took  it  as  it  was,  and,  as  protectionists, 


552  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

were  satisfied  with  it.  The  tariff  of  1842  proved  that  Mr.  Clay 
was  right  in  his  anticipations,  and  that  there  was  nothing  in  that 
of  18S3  that  could  operate  as  a  har  to  such  a  measure.  A  pro- 
tracted pacification  was  secured,  a  civil  war  prevented,  and  all 
power  was  wrested  from  the  hands  of  General  Jackson  and  his 
party  to  hreak  down  the  protective  policy.  If  this  had  not  been 
done  suddenly,  on  the  instant,  it  never  could  have  been  done ; 
and  the  country  was  indebted  to  Mr.  Clay  for  this  great  achieve- 
ment. The  Compromise  Tariff  of  1833  was  conceived  quick, 
on  the  exigency  ;  it  was  quickly  acted  upon,  and  quickly  passed. 
Strange  to  say,  Mr.  Calhoun  and  his  party  went  for  it,  in  prefer- 
ence to  Verplanck's  bill.  Mr.  Calhoun  was  willing  to  be  rescued 
from  the  hands  of  General  Jackson  by  Mr.  Clay  and  his  friends, 
notwithstanding  that  Verplanck's  bill  was  more  in  accordance 
with  the  wishes  of  the  South.  The  passage  of  the  tariff  of 
1833  was  a  sort  of  coup  de  main  operation,  and  the  only  wonder 
is,  that  it  was  so  thoroughly  charged  with  wisdom,  and  foresight, 
and  circumspection,  as  afterward  to  sustain  the  most  severe 
scrutiny  without  being  impeached.  The  vote  of  the  House  for 
the  tariff  was  one  hundred  and  twenty  to  eighty-four,  and  that 
of  the  Senate  twenty-nine  to  sixteen. 

The  following  vindication  of  the  measure  will  well  repay  an 
attentive  perusal.] 

Being  anxious,  Mr.  President,  that  this  bill   should  pass,  and  pass  this 
day,  I  will  abridge  as  much  as  I  can  the  observations  I  am  called  upon  to 
make.     1  have  long,  with  pleasure  and  pride,  co-operated  in  the  public 
service  with  the  senator  from  Massachusetts ;  and  I  have  found  him  faith- 
ful, enlightened,  and  patriotic.     I  have  not  a  particle  of  doubt  as  to  the 
pure  and  elevated  motives  which  actuate  him.    Under  these  circumstances, 
it  gives  me  deep  and  lasting  regret  to  find  myself  compelled  to  differ  from 
him  as  to  a  measure  involving  vital  interests,  and  perhaps  the  safety  of  the 
Union.    On  the  other  hand,  I  derive  great  consolation  from  finding  myself, 
on  this  occasion,  in  the  midst  of  friends  with  whom  I  have  long  acted,  in 
peace  and  in  war,  and  especially  with  the  honorable  senator  from  Maine, 
(Mr.  Holmes),  with  whom  I  had  the  happiness  to  unite  in  a  memorable  in- 
stance.    It  was  in  this  very  chamber,  that  senator  presiding  in  the  com- 
mittee of  the  Senate,  and  I  in  committee  of  twenty-four  of  the  House  of 
Representatives,  on  a  Sabbath  day,  that  the  terms  were  adjusted,  by  which 
the  compromise  of  the  Missouri  question  was  effected.     Then  the  dark 
clouds  that  hung  over  our  beloved  country  were  dispersed  ;  and  now  the 
thunders  from  others  not  less  threatening,  and  which  have  been  longer  ac- 
cumulating, will,  I  hope,  roll  over  us  harmless  and  without  injury. 


ON   THE    COMPROMISE    TARIFF.  55 

The  senator  from  Massachusetts  objects  to  the  bill  under  consideration, 
on  various  grounds.  He  argues  that  it  imposes  unjustifiable  restraints  on 
the  power  of  future  legislation ;  that  it  abandons  the  protective  policy,  and 
that  the  details  of  the  bill  are  practically  defective.  He  does  not  object  to 
the  gradual,  but  very  considerable  reduction  of  duties  which  is  made  prior 
to  1842.  To  that  he  could  not  object,  because  it  is  a  species  of  prospective 
provision,  as  he  admits,  in  conformity  with  numerous  precedents  on  our 
statute-book.  He  does  not  object  so  much  to  the  state  of  the  proposed  law 
prior  to  1842,  during  a  period  of  nine  years;  but  throwing  himself  for- 
ward to  the  termination  of  that  period,  he  contends  that  Cougress  will  then 
find  itself  under  inconvenient  shackles,  imposed  by  our  indiscretion.  In 
the  first  place,  I  would  remark,  that  the  bill  contains  no  obligatory 
pledges ;  it  could  make  none  ;  none  are  attempted.  The  power  over  the 
subject  is  in  the  Constitution — put  thereby  those  who  formed  it,  and  liable 
to  be  taken  out  only  by  an  amendment  of  the  instrument.  The  next  Con- 
gress, and  every  succeeding  Congress,  will  undoubtedly  have  the  power  to 
repeal  the  law  whenever  they  may  think  proper.  Whether  they  will  ex- 
ercise it  or  not  will  depend  upon  a  sound  discretion,  applied  to  the  state 
of  the  whole  country,  and  estimating  fairly  the  consequences  of  the  repeal, 
both  upon  the  general  harmony  and  the  common  interests.  Then  the  bill 
is  founded  in  a  spirit  of  compromise.  Now  in  all  compromises  there  must 
be  mutual  concessions.  The  friends  of  free  trade  insist,  that  duties  should 
be  laid  in  reference  to  revenue  alone.  The  friends  of  American  industry 
say,  that  another,  if  not  paramount  object  in  laying  them,  should  be,  to 
diminish  the  consumption  of  foreign,  and  increase  that  of  domestic  pro- 
ducts. On  this  point  the  parties  divide,  and  between  these  two  opposite 
opinions  a  reconciliation  is  to  be  effected,  if  it  can  be  accomplished.  The 
bill  assumes  as  a  basis  adequate  protection  for  nine  years,  and  less  beyond 
that  term.  The  friends  of  protection  say  to  their  opponents,  We  are  willing 
to  take  a  lease  of  nine  years,  with  the  long  chapter  of  accidents  beyond 
that  period,  including  the  chance  of  war,  the  restoration  of  concord,  and 
along  with  it,  a  conviction  common  to  all,  of  the  utility  of  protection ;  and 
in  consideration  of  it,  if,  in  1842,  none  of  these  contingences  shall  have 
been  realized,  we  are  willing  to  submit  as  long  as  Congress  may  think 
proper,  to  a  maximum  rate  of  twenty  per  centum,  with  the  power  of  dis- 
crimination below  it,  cash  duties,  home  valuations,  and  a  liberal  list  of  free 
articles,  for  the  benefit  of  the  manufacturing  interest.  To  these  conditions 
the  opponents  of  protection  are  ready  to  accede.  The  measure  is  what  it 
professes  to  be,  a  compromise ;  but  it  imposes  and  could  impose  no  restric- 
tion upon  the  will  or  power  of  a  future  Congress.  Doubtless  great  respect 
will  be  paid,  as  it  ought  to  be  paid,  to  the  serious  condition  of  the  country 
that  has  prompted  the  passage  of  this  bill:  Any  future  Congress  that 
might  disturb  this  adjustment  would  act  under  a  high  responsibility,  but  it 
would  be  entirely  within  its  competency  to  repeal,  if  it  thought  proper,  the 
whole  bill.     It  is  far  from  the  object  of  those  who  support  this  bill,  to 


554  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

abandon  or  surrender  the  policy  of  protecting  American  industry.  Its 
protection  or  encouragement  may  be  accomplished  in  various  ways — first, 
by  bounties,  as  far  as  they  are  within  the  constitutional  power  of  Congress 
to  offer  them  ;  second,  by  prohibitions,  totally  excluding  the  foreign  rival 
article  ;  third,  by  high  duties,  without  regard  to  the  aggregate  amount  of 
revenue  which  they  produce  ;  fourth,  by  discriminating  duties  so  adjusted 
as  to  limit  the  revenue  to  the  economical  wants  of  government;  and,  fifth, 
by  the  admission  of  the  raw  material,  and  articles  essential  to  manufac- 
tures free  of  duty ;  to  which  may  be  added,  cash  duties,  home  valuations, 
and  the  regulation  of  auctions.  A  perfect  system  of  protection  would  com- 
prehend most  if  not  all  these  modes  of  affording  it.  There  might  be  at 
this  time  a  prohibition  of  certain  articles  (ardent  spirits  and  coarse  cottons, 
for  example),  to  public  advantage.  If  there  were  not  inveterate  prejudices 
and  conflicting  opinions  prevailing  (and  what  statesman  can  totally  disre- 
gard impediments  ?)  such  a  compound  system  might  be  established. 

Now,  Mr.  President,  before  the  assertion  is  made,  that  the  bill  sur- 
renders the  protective  policy,  gentlemen  should  understand  perfectly  what 
it  does  not  as  well  as  what  it  does  propose.  It  impairs  no  power  of  Con- 
gress over  the  whole  subject;  it  contains  no  promise  or  pledge  whatever, 
express  or  implied,  as  to  bounties,  prohibitions,  or  auctions  ;  it  does  not 
touch  the  power  of  Congress  in  regard  to  them,  and  Congress  is  perfectly 
free  to  exercise  that  power  at  any  time ;  it  expressly  recognizes  discrimi- 
nating duties  within  a  prescribed  limit;  it  provides  for  cash  duties  and 
home  valuations  ;  and  it  secures  a  free  list,  embracing  numerous  articles, 
some  of  high  importance  to  the  manufacturing  arts.  Of  all  the  modes  of 
protection  which  I  have  enumerated,  it  affects  only  the  third  ;  that  is  to 
say,  the  imposition  of  high  duties,  producing  a  revenue  beyond  the  wants 
of  government.  The  senator  from  Massachusetts  contends  that  the  policy 
of  protection  was  settled  in  1816,  and  that  it  has  ever  since  been  maintain- 
ed. Sir,  it  was  settled  long  before  1816.  It  is  coeval  with  the  present 
Constitution,  and  it  will  continue,  under  some  of  its  various  aspects,  during 
the  existence  of  the  government.  No  nation  can  exist,  no  nation  perhaps 
ever  existed,  without  protection  in  some  form,  and,  to  some  extent,  being 
applied  to  its  own  industry.  The  direct  and  necessary  consequence  of 
abandoning  the  protection  of  its  own  industry,  would  be  to  subject  it  to 
the  restrictions  and  prohibitions  of  foreign  powers ;  and  no  nation,  for  any 
length  of  time,  can  endure  an  alien  legislation  in  which  it  has  no  will. 
The  discontents  which  prevail,  and  the  safety  of  the  republic,  may  require 
the  modification  of  a  specific  mode  of  protection,  but  it  must  be  preserved 
in  some  other  more  acceptable  shape. 

All  that  was  settled  in  1816,  in  1824,  and  in  1828,  was,  that  protection 
should  be  afforded  by  high  duties,  without  regard  to  the  amount  of  the 
revenue  which  they  might  yield.  During  that  whole  period,  we  had  a 
public  debt  which  absorbed  all  the  surpluses  beyond  the  ordinary  wants 
of  government.     Between  1816  and   1824,  the  revenue  was  liable  to  the 


ON    THE    COMPROMISE    TARIFF.  555 

greatest  fluctuations,  vibrating:  between  the  extremes  of  about  nineteen  and 
thirty-six  millions  of  dollars.  If  there  were  more  revenue,  more  debt  was 
paid ;  if  less,  a  smaller  amount  was  reimbursed.  Such  was  sometimes  tho 
deficiency  of  the  revenue,  that  it  became  necessary  to  the  ordinary  ex- 
penses of  government,  to  trench  upon  the  ten  millions  annually  set  apart 
as  a  sinking-fund  to  extinguish  the  public  debt.  If  the  public  debt  re- 
mained undischarged,  or  we  had  any  other  practical  mode  of  appropriating 
the  surplus  revenue,  the  form  of  protection,  by  high  duties,  might  be  con- 
tinued without  public  detriment.  It  is  the  payment  of  the  public  debt, 
then,  and  the  arrest  of  internal  improvements  by  the  exercise  of  the  veto, 
that  unsettles  that  specific  form  of  protection.  Nobody  supposes,  or  pro- 
poses, that  we  should  continue  to  levy,  by  means  of  high  duties,  a  large 
annual  surplus,  of  which  no  practical  use  can  be  made,  for  the  sake  of  the 
incidental  protection  which  they  afford.  The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 
estimates  that  surplus  on  the  existing  scale  of  duties,  and  with  the  other 
sources  of  revenue,  at  six  millions  annually.  An  annual  accumulation  at 
that  rate  would,  in  a  few  years,  bring  into  the  treasury  the  whole  currency 
of  the  country,  to  lie  there  inactive  and  dormant. 

This  view  of  the  condition  of  the  country  has  impressed  every  public 
man  with  the  necessity  of  some  modification  of  the  principles  of  protection, 
so  far  as  it  depends  upon  high  duties.  The  senator  from  Massachusetts 
feels  it ;  and  hence,  in  the  resolutions  which  he  submitted,  he  proposes  to 
reduce  the  duties,  so  as  to  limit  the  amount  of  the  revenue  to  the  wants 
of  the  government.  With  him  revenue  is  the  principal,  protection  the 
subordinate,  object.  If  protection  can  not  be  enjoyed  after  such  a  reduction 
of  duties  as  he  thinks  ought  to  be  made,  it  is  not  to  be  extended.  He  says, 
specific  duties  and  the  power  of  discrimination  are  preserved  by  his  reso- 
lutions. So  they  may  be  under  the  operation  of  the  bill.  The  only  differ- 
ence between  the  two  schemes  is,  that  the  bill,  in  the  maximum  which  it 
provides,  suggests  a  certain  limit,  while  his  resolutions  lay  down  none. 
Below  that  maximum,  the  principle  of  discrimination  and  specific  duties 
may  be  applied.  The  senator  from  Pennsylvania  (Mr.  Dallas),  who,  equally 
with  the  senator  from  Massachusetts,  is  opposed  to  this  bill,  would  have 
agreed  to  the  bill  if  it  had  fixed  thirty  instead  of  twenty  per  centum  ;  and 
he  would  have  dispensed  with  home  valuation,  and  come  down  to  the  rev- 
enue standard  in  five  or  six  years.  Now,  Mr.  President,  I  prefer,  and  I 
think  the  manufacturing  interest  will  prefer,  nine  years  of  adequate  pro- 
tection, home  valuations,  and  twenty  per  centum,  to  the  plan  of  the  senator 
from  Pennsylvania. 

Mr.  President,  I  want  to  be  perfectly  understood  as  to  the  motives  which 
have  prompted  me  to  offer  this  measure.  I  repeat  what  I  said  on  the  in- 
troduction of  it,  that  they  are,  first,  to  preserve  the  manufacturing  interest, 
and,  secondly,  to  quiet  the  country.  I  believe  the  American  system  to  be 
in  the  greatest  danger ;  and  I  believe  it  can  be  placed  on  a  better  and  safer 
foundation  at  this  session  than  at  the  next.   I  heard  with  surprise  my  friend 


556  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

from  Massachusetts  say  that  nothing  had  occurred  within  the  last  six  months 
to  increase  its  hazard.  I  entreat  him  to  review  that  opinion.  Is  it  correct? 
Is  the  issue  of  numerous  elections,  including  that  of  the  highest  officer  of 
the  government,  nothing?  Is  the  explicit  recommendation  of  that  officer, 
in  his  message,  at  the  opening  of  the  session,  sustained,  as  he  is,  by  a  recent 
triumphant  election,  nothing?  Is  his  declaration  in  his  proclamation,  that 
the  burdens  of  the  South  ought  to  be  relieved,  nothing?  Is  the  intro- 
duction of  a  bill  into  the  House  of  Representatives  during  this  session, 
sanctioned  by  the  head  of  the  treasury  and  the  administration,  prostrating 
the  greater  part  of  the  manufactures  of  the  country,  nothing  ?  Are  the 
increasing  discontents,  nothing?  Is  the  tendency  of  recent  events  to  unite 
the  whole  South,  nothing  ?  What  have  we  not  witnessed  in  this  chamber? 
Friends  of  the  administration,  bursting  all  the  ties  which  seemed  indissolu- 
bly  to  unite  them  to  its  chief,  and,  with  few  exceptions,  south  of  the  Po- 
tomac, opposing,  and  vehemently  opposing,  a  favorite  measure  of  that 
administration,  which  three  short  mouths  ago  they  contributed  to  estab- 
lish !  Let  us  not  deceive  ourselves.  Now  is  the  time  to  adjust  the  question 
in  a  manner  satisfactory  to  both  parties.  Put  it  off  until  the  next  session, 
and  the  alternative  may,  and  probably  then  would,  be  a  speedy  and  ruinous 
reduction  of  the  tariff,  or  a  civil  war  with  the  entire  South. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  majority  of  the  dominant  party  is  adverse  to 
the  tariff.     There  are  many  honorable  exceptions,  the  senator  from  New 
Jersey  (Mr.  Dickerson),  among  them.     But  for  the  exertions  of  the  other 
party,  the  tariff  would  have  been  long  since  sacrificed.     Now  let  us  look  at 
the  composition  of  the  two  branches  of  Congress  at  the  next  session.     In 
this  body  we  lose  three  friends  of  the  protective  policy,  without  being  sure 
of  ginning  one.     Here,  judging  from  present  appearances,  we  shall  at  the 
next  session  be  in  the  minority.     In  the  House  it  is  notorious,  that  there  is 
a  considerable  accession  to  the  number  of  the  dominant  party.     How  then, 
I  ask,  is  the  system  to  be  sustained  against  numbers,  against  the  whole 
weight  of  the  administration,  against  the  united  South,  and  against  the  in- 
creased pending  danger  of  civil  war?     There  is,  indeed,  one  contingency 
that  might  save  it,  but  that  is  too  uncertain  to  rely  upon.     A  certain  class 
of  northern  politicians,  professing  friendship  to  the  tariff,  have  been  charged 
with  being  secretly  inimical  to  it  for  political  purposes.     They  may  change 
their  ground,  and  come  out  open  and  undisguised  supporters  of  the  system. 
They  may  even  find  in  the  measure  which  I  have  brought  forward  a  motive 
for  their  conversion.     Sir,  I  shall  rejoice  in  it,  from  whatever  cause  it  may 
proceed.     And,  if  they  can  give  greater  strength  and  durability  to  the  sys- 
tem, and  at  the  same  time  quiet  the  discontents  of  its  opponents,  I  shall 
rejoice  still  more.     They  shall  not  find  me  disposed  to  abandon  it,  because 
it  has  drawn  succor  from  an  unexpected  quarter.     No,  Mr.  President,  it  is 
not  destruction,  but  preservation  of  the  system  at  wdiich  we  aim.     If  dan- 
gers now  assail  it,  we  have  not  created  them.    I  have  sustained  it  upon  the 
strongest  and  clearest  convictions  of  its  expediency.     They  are  entirely 


ON    THE    COMPROMISE    TARIFF.  557 

unaltered.  Had  others,  who  avow  attachment  to  it,  supported  it  with  equal 
zeal  and  straightforwardness,  it  would  be  now  free  from  embarrassment ; 
but  with  them  it  has  been  a  secondary  interest.  I  utter  no  complaints;  I 
make  no  reproaches.  I  wish  only  to  defend  myself  now,  as  heretofore, 
against  unjust  assaults.  I  have  been  represented  as  the  father  of  this 
6ystem,  and  I  am  charged  with  an  unnatural  abandonment  of  my  own 
offspring.  I  have  never  arrogated  to  myself  any  such  intimate  relation  to 
it.  I  have,  indeed,  cherished  it  with  paternal  fondness,  and  my  affection  is 
undiminished,  but  in  what  condition  do  I  find  this  child  ?  It  is  in  the 
hands  of  the  Philistines,  who  would  strangle  it.  I  fly  to  its  rescue,  to 
snatch  it  from  their  custody,  and  to  place  it  on  a  bed  of  security  and  repose 
for  nine  years,  where  it  may  grow  and  strengthen,  and  become  acceptable 
to  the  whole  people.  I  behold  a  torch  about  being  applied  to  a  favorite 
edifice,  and  I  would  save  it  if  possible  before  it  is  wrapped  in  flames,  or  at 
least  preserve  the  precious  furniture  which  it  contains.  I  wish  to  see  the 
tariff  separated  from  the  politics  of  the  country,  that  business  men  may  go 
to  work  in  security,  with  some  prospect  of  stability  in  our  laws,  and  with- 
out every  thing  being  staked  on  the  issue  of  elections,  as  it  were  on  the 
hazards  of  the  die. 

And  the  other  leading  object  which  has  prompted  the  introduction  of 
this  measure,  the  tranquilizing  of  the  country,  is  no  less  important.     All 
wise  human  legislation  must  consult  in  some  degree  the  passions,  and  prej- 
udices, and  feelings,  as  well  as  the  interests  of  the  people.     It  would  be 
vain  and  foolish  to  proceed  at  all  times,  and  under  all  circumstances,  upon 
the  notion  of  absolute  certainty  in  any  system,  or  infallibility  in  any  dogma, 
and  to  push  these  out  without  regard  to  any  consequences.     With  us,  who 
entertain  the  opinion  that  Congress  is  constitutionally  invested  with  power 
to  protect  domestic  industry,  it  is  a  question  of  mere  expediency  as  to  the 
form,  the  degree,  and  the  time  that  the  protection   shall  be  afforded.     In 
weio-hino-  all  the  considerations  which  should  control  and  regulate  the  ex- 
ercise  of  that  power,  we  ought  not  to  overlook  what  is  due  to  those  who 
honestly  entertain  opposite  opinious  to  large  masses  of  the  community,  and 
to  deep,  long-cherished,  and  growing  prejudices.     Perceiving, ourselves,  no 
constitutional  impediment,  we  have  less  difficulty  in   accommodating  our- 
6elves   to   the   sense  of  the   people   of  the  United  States  upon  this  in- 
teresting subject.     I  do   believe  that  a  majority  of  them  is  in  favor  of 
this  policy  ;  but  I  am  induced  to  believe  this  almost  against   evidence. 
Two  States  in  New  England,  which  have  been  in  favor  of  the  system,  have 
recently  come  out  against  it.     Other  States  of  the  North  and  East  have 
shown  a  remarkable  indifference  to  its  preservation.     If,  indeed,  they  have 
wished  to  preserve  it,  they  have  nevertheless  placed  the  powers  of  govern- 
ment in  hands  which  ordinary  information   must  have  assured  them  were 
rather  a  hazardous  depository.    With  us  in  the  West,  although  we  are  not 
without  seme  direct  and  considerable  indirect  interest  in  the  system,  we 
have  supported  it  more  upon  national  than  sectional  grounds. 


558  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

Meantime    the  opposition   of  a  large  and    respectable  section  of  the 
Union,  stimulated  by  political   success,   has  increased,   and  is  increasing. 
Discontents  are  multiplying  and   assuming  new  and   dangerous  aspects. 
They  have  been  cherished  by  the  course  and  hopes  inspired   during  this 
administration,  which,  at  the  very  moment  that  it  threatens  and  recom- 
mends the  use  of  the  powers  of  the  Union,  proclaims   aloud  the  injustice 
of  the  system  which  it  would  enforce.     These  discontents  are  not  limited 
to  those  who  maintain  the   extravagant  theory   of  nullification  ;  they  are 
not  confined  to  one  State  ;  they  are  coextensive  with  the  entire  South,  and 
exteud  even  to  northern  States.     It  has  been  intimated  by  the  senator 
from  Massachusetts,  that,  if  we  legislate  at   this  session  on  the  tariff,  we 
would  seem  to  legislate  under   the  influence  of  a   panic.     I  believe,  Mr. 
President,  I  am  not  more  sensible  to  danger  of  any  kiud,  than  my  fellow- 
men  are  generally.     It  perhaps  requires  as  much  moral  courage  to  legis- 
late under  the  imputation  of  a  panic,  as  to  refrain  from  it  lest  such  an  im? 
putation  should  be   made.     But  he  who  regards  the  present  question  as 
being  limited  to  South  Carolina  alone,  takes  a  view  of  it  much  too  con- 
tracted.    There  is  a  sympathy  of  feeling  and  interest  throughout  the  wholo 
South.    Other  southern  States  may  differ  from  that  as  to  the  remedy  to  be 
now  used,  but  all  agree  (great  as  in  my  humble  judgment  is  their  error) 
in  the  substantial  justice  of  the  cause.     Can  there  be  a  doubt  that  those 
who  think  in  common  will  sooner  or  later   act  in  concert  ?     Events  are 
on  the  wing,  and  hastening  this  co-operation.     Since  the  commencement 
of  this  session,  the  most  powerful  southern  member  of  the  Union  has  taken 
a  measure  which  can  not  fail  to  lead  to  important  consequences.     She  has 
deputed  one  of  her  most  distinguished  citizens  to  request  a  suspension   of 
measures  of  resistance.     No  attentive  observer  can  doubt  that  the  suspen- 
sion will  be  made.     Well,  sir,  suppose  it  takes  place,  and  Congress  should 
fail  at  the  next  session  to  afford  the  redress  which  will  be  solicited,  what 
course  would  every  principle  of  honor,  and  every  consideration  of  the  in- 
terests of  Virginia,  as  she  understands  them,  exact  from  her  ?     Would  she 
not  make  common  cause  with  South  Carolina  ?  and  if  she  did,  would  not 
the  entire  South  eventually  become  parties  to  tbe  contest  ?     The  rest  of 
the  Union  might  put  down  the  South,  and  reduce  it  to  submission ;  but,  to 
say  nothing  of  the  uncertainty  and  hazards  of  all  war,  is  that  a  desirable 
state  of  things  ?     Ought  it  not  to  be  avoided  if  it  can  be  honorably  pre- 
vented ?     I  am  not  one  of  those  who  think  that  we  must  rely  exclusively 
upon  moral  power,  and  never  resort  to  physical  force.     I  know  too  well  the 
frailties  and  follies  of  man,  in  his  collective  as  well  as  individual  character, 
to  reject  in  all  possible  cases,  the  employment  of  force ;  but  I  do  think 
that  when  resorted  to,  especially  among  the  members  of  a  confederacy, 
it  should  manifestly  appear  to  be  the  only  remaining  appeal. 

But  suppose  the  present  Congress  terminates  without  any  adjustment  of 
the  tariff,  let  us  see  in  what  condition  its  friends  will  find  themselves  at  the 
next  session.     South  Carolina  will  have  postponed  the  execution  of  the 


ON    THE    COMPEOMISE    TARIFF.  559 

law  passed  to  carry  iuto  effect  her  ordinance,  until  the  end  of  that  session. 
All  will  be  quiet  in  the  South  for  the  present.     The  president,  in  his  open- 
ing message,  will  urge  that  justice,  as  he  terras  it,  be  done  to  the  South  ; 
and  that  the   burdens  imposed  upon   it  by  the  tariff,  be  removed.     The 
whole  weight  of  the  administration,  the  united  South,  and  majorities  of  the 
dominant  party,  in  both  branches  of  Congress,  will  be  found  in  active  co- 
operation.    Will  the  gentleman  from  Massachusetts  tell  me  how  we  are  to 
save  the  tariff  against  this  united  and  irresistible  force  ?     They  will  accuse 
us  of  indifference  to  the  preservation  of  the  Union,  and  of  being  willing  to 
expose  the  country  to  the  dangers  of  civil  war.     The  fact  of  South  Caro- 
lina's postponing  of  her  ordinance,  at  the  instance  of  Virginia,  and  once 
more  appealing  to  the  justice  of  Congress,  will  be  pressed  with  great  em- 
phasis and  effect.     It  does  appear  to  me  impossible  that  we  can  prevent  a 
most  injurious  modification  of  the  tariff,  at  the  next  session,  and  that  this 
is  the  favorable  moment  for  an  equitable  arrangement  of  it.     I  have  been 
subjected  to  animadversion,  for  the  admission  of  the  fact,  that,  at  the  next 
session,  our  opponents  will  be  stronger,  and  the   friends  of  the  American 
system  weaker  than  they  are  in  this  Congress.     But,  is  it  not  so?     And  is 
it  not  the  duty  of  every  man,  who  aspires  to  be  a  statesman,  to  look  at  na- 
ked facts  as  they  really  are  ?     Must  he  suppress  them  ?     Ought  he,  like 
children,  to  throw  the  counterpane  over  his  eyes,  and  persuade  himself  that 
he  is  secure  from  danger  ?     Are  not  our  opponents  as  well  informed  as  we 
are,  about  their  own  strength  ? 

If  we  adjourn,  without  any  permanent  settlement  of  the  tariff,  in  what 
painful  suspense  and  terrible  uncertainty  shall  we  not  leave  the  manufac- 
turers and  business  men   of  the  country '?     All  eyes  will  be  turned,  with 
trembling  and  fear,  to  the  next  session.     Operations  will  be  circumscribed, 
and  new  enterprises  checked  ;  or,  if  otherwise,  ruin  and  bankruptcy  may 
be  the  consequence.     I  believe,  sir,  this  measure,  which  offers  a  reasonable 
guaranty  for  permanence  and  stability,  will  be  hailed  by  practical  men  with 
pleasure.     The  political  manufacturers  may  be  against 'it,  but  it  will  com- 
mand the  approbation  of  a  large  majority  of  the  business  manufacturers  of 
the  country.     But  the  objections  of  the  honorable  senator  from  Massachu- 
setts are  principally  directed  to  the  period  beyond  1842.     During  the  in- 
termediate time,  there  is  every  reason  to  hope  and  believe  that  the  bill  se- 
cures adequate  protection.     All  my  information  assures  me  of  this ;  and 
it  is   demonstrated  by  the  fact,  that,   if  the  measure  of   protection,  se- 
cured prior  to  the  31st  of  December,  1841,  were  permanent;  or  if  the  bill 
were  even  silent  beyond  that  period,  it  would  command  the  cordial  and 
unanimous  concurrence  of  the  friends  of  the  policy.     What  then  divides, 
what  alarms  us  ?     It  is  what  may  possibly  be  the  state  of  things  in  the 
year  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  forty-two,  or  subsequently  !     Now,  sir, 
even  if  that  should  be  as  bad  as  the  most  vivid  imagination,  or  the   most 
eloquent  tongue  could  depict  it,  if  we  have  intermediate  safety  and  security, 
it  does  not  seem  to  me  wise  to  rush  upon  certain  and  present  evils,  because 


560  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

of  those  which,  admitting  their  possibility,  are  very  remote  and  contingent 
What !  shall  we  not  extinguish  the  flame  which  is  bursting  through  the 
roof  that  covers  us,  because,  at  some  future  and  distant  day,  we  may  be 
again  threatened  with  conflagration  ? 

I  do  not  admit  that  this  bill  abandons,  or  fails,  by  its  provisions,  to  se- 
cure reasonable  protection  beyond  1842.  I  can  not  know,  I  pretend  not 
to  know,  what  will  then  be  the  actual  condition  of  this  country,  and  of  the 
manufacturing  arts,  and  their  relative  condition  to  the  rest  of  the  world. 
I  would  as  soon  confide  in  the  forecast  of  the  honorable  senator  from  Mas- 
sachusetts as  in  that  of  any  other  mau  in  this  Senate,  or  in  this  country; 
but  neither  he  nor  any  one  else  can  tell  what  that  condition  will  then  be. 
The  degree  of  protection  which  will  be  required  for  domestic  industy  be- 
yond 1842,  depends  upon  the  reduction  of  wages,  the  accumulation  of 
capital,  the  improvement  in  skill,  the  protection  of  machinery,  and  the 
cheapening  of  the  price,  at  home,  of  essential  articles,  such  as  fuel,  iron, 
and  so  forth.  I  do  not  think  that  the  honorable  senator  can  throw  him- 
self forward  to  1842,  and  tell  us  what,  in  all  these  particulars,  will  be  the 
state  of  this  country,  and  its  relative  state  to  other  countries.  We  know 
that,  in  all  human  probability,  our  numbers  will  be  increased  by  an 
addition  of  one  third,  at  least,  to  their  present  amonnt,  and  that  may 
materially  reduce  wages.  We  have  reason  to  believe  that  our  capital  will 
be  augmented,  our  skill  improved  ;  and  we  know  that  great  progress  has 
been  made,  and  is  making,  in  machinery.  There  is  a  constant  tendency  to 
decrease  in  the  price  of  iron  and  coal.  The  opening  of  new  mines  and 
new  channels  of  communication  must  continue  to  lower  it.  The  success- 
ful introduction  of  the  process  of  cooking  will  have  great  effect.  The  price 
of  these  articles,  one  of  the  most  opulent  and  intelligent  manufacturing 
houses  in  this  country  assures  me,  is  a  principal  cause  of  the  present  neces- 
sity of  protection  to  the  cotton  interest ;  and  that  house  is  strongly  incliued 
to  think  that  twenty  per  centum,  with  the  other  advantages  secured  in 
this  bill,  may  do  beyond  1842.  Then,  sir,  what  effect  may  not  convulsions 
and  revolutions  in  Europe,  if  any  should  arise,  produce  ?  I  am  far  from 
desiring  them  that  our  country  may  profit  by  their  occurrence.  Her  great- 
ness and  glory  rest,  I  hope,  upon  a  more  solid  and  more  generous  basis. 
But  we  can  not  shut  our  eyes  to  the  fact,  that  our  greatest  manufacturing, 
as  well  as  commercial  competitor,  is  undergoing  a  momentous  political  ex- 
periment, the  issue  of  which  is  far  from  being  absolutely  certain.  Who 
can  raise  the  vail  of  the  succeeding  nine  years,  and  show  what,  at  their 
termination,  will  be  the  degree  of  competition  which  Great  Britain  can  ex- 
ercise toward  us  in  the  manufacturing  arts  ? 

Suppose,  in  the  progress  of  gradual  descent  toward  the  revenue  standard 
for  which  this  bill  provides,  it  should  some  years  hence  become  evident 
that  further  protection,  beyond  1842,  than  that  which  it  contemplates,  may 
be  necessary,  can  it  be  doubted  that,  in  some  form  or  other,  it  will  be  ap- 
plied ?   Our  misfortune  has  been,  and  yet  is,  that  the  public  mind  has  been 


ON   THE   COMPROMISE   TARIFF.  561 

constantly  kept  in  a  state  of  feverish  excitement,  in  respect  to  this  system 
of  policy.  Conventions,  elections,  Congress,  the  public  press,  have  been, 
for  years  all  acting-  upon  tbe  tariff,  and  the  tariff  acting  upon  them  alL 
Prejudices  have  been  excited,  passions  kindled,  and  mutual  irritations  car- 
ried to  the  highest  pitch  of  exasperation,  insomuch  that  good  feelings  have 
been  almost  extinguished,  and  the  voice  of  reason  and  experience  silenced, 
among  the  members  of  the  confederacy.  Let  us  separate  the  tariff  from  the 
agitating  politics  of  the  country,  place  it  upon  a  stable  and  firm  founda- 
tion, and  allow  our  enterprising  countrymen  to  demonstrate  to  the  whole 
Union,  by  their  skillful  and  successful  labors,  the  inappreciable  value  of 
the  arts.  If  they  can  have  what  they  have  never  yet  enjoyed,  some  years 
of  repose  and  tranquillity,  they  will  make,  silently,  more  converts  to  the 
policy,  than  would  be  made  during  a  long  period  of  anxious  struggle  and 
boisterous  contention.  Above  all,  I  count  upon  the  good  effects  resulting 
from  a  restoration  to  the  harmony  of  this  divided  people,  upon  their  good 
sense  and  their  love  of  justice.  Who  can  doubt,  that  when  passions  have 
subsided,  and  reason  has  resumed  her  empire,  that  there  will  be  a  disposi- 
tion throughout  the  whole  Union,  to  render  ample  justice  to  all  its  parts  ? 
Who  will  believe  that  any  section  of  this  great  confederacy  would  look 
with  indifference  to  the  prostration  of  the  interests  of  another  section,  by 
distant  and  selfish  foreign  nations,  regardless  alike  of  the  welfare  of  us  all  ? 
No,  sir  ;  I  have  no  fears  beyond  1842.  The  people  of  the  United  States 
are  brethren,  made  to  love  and  respect  each  other.  Momentary  causes 
may  seem  to  alienate  them,  but,  like  family  differences,  they  will  terminate 
in  a  closer  and  more  affectionate  union  than  ever.  And  how  much  more 
estimable  will  be  a  system  of  protection,  based  on  common  conviction  and 
common  consent,  and  planted  in  the  bosoms  of  all,  than  one  wrenched  by 
power  from  reluctant  and  protesting  weakness  ? 

That  such  a  system  will  be  adopted,  if  it  should  be  necessary  for  the 
period  of  time  subsequent  to  1842,  I  will  not  doubt.  But  in  the  scheme 
which  I  originally  proposed,  I  did  not  rely  exclusively,  great  as  my  reliance 
is,  upon  the  operation  of  fraternal  feelings,  the  return  of  reason,  and  a 
sense  of  justice.  The  scheme  contained  an  appeal  to  the  interests  of  the 
South.  According  to  it,  unmanufactured  cotton  was  to  be  a  free  article 
after  1842.  Gentlemen  from  that  quarter  have  again  and  again  asserted 
that  they  were  indifferent  to  the  duty  of  three  cents  per  pound  on  cotton, 
and  that  they  feared  no  foreign  competition.  I  have  thought  otherwise  ; 
but  I  was  willing,  by  way  of  experiment,  to  take  them  at  their  word  ;  not 
that  I  was  opposed  to  the  protection  of  cotton,  but  believing  that  a  few 
cargoes  of  foreign  cotton  introduced  into  our  northern  ports,  free  of  duty, 
would  hasten  our  southern  friends  to  come  here  and  ask  that  protection  for 
their  great  staple,  which  is  wanted  in  other  sections  for  their  interests. 
That  feature  in  the  scheme  was  stricken  out  in  the  select  committee,  but 
not  by  the  consent  of  my  friend  from  Delaware  (Mr.  Clayton),  or  myself. 
Still,  after  1842,  the  South  may  want  protection  for  sugar,  for  tobacco,  for 

3a 


562  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

Virginia,  coal,  perhaps  for  cotton  and  other  articles,  while  other  quarters 
may  need  it  for  wool,  woolens,  iron,  and  cotton  fabrics  :  and  these  mutual 
wants,  if  they  should  exist,  will  lead,  I  hope,  to  some  amicable  adjustment 
of  a  tariff  for  that  distant  period,  satisfactory  to  all.  The  theory  of  pro- 
tection supposes,  too,  that,  after  a  certain  time,  the  protected  arts  will  have 
acquired  such  strength  and  perfection  as  will  enable  them  subsequently, 
unaided,  to  stand  up  against  foreign  competition.  If,  as"  I  have  no  doubt, 
this  should  prove  to  be  correct,  it  will,  on  the  arrival  of  1842,  encourage 
all  parts  of  the  Union  to  consent  to  the  continuance  of  longer  protection 
to  the  few  articles  which  may  then  require  it. 

The  bill  before  us  strongly  recommends  itself  by  its  equity  and  impar- 
tiality. It  favors  no  one  interest,  and  no  one  State,  hy  an  unjust  sacrifice 
of  others.  It  deals  equally  by  all.  Its  basis  is  the  act  of  July  last.  That 
act  was  passed,  after  careful  and  thorough  investigation,  and  long  delibera- 
tion, continued  through  several  months.  Although  it  may  not  have  been 
perfect  in  its  adjustment  of  the  proper  measure  of  protection  to  each  article 
which  was  supposed  to  merit  it,  it  is  not  likely,  that,  even  with  the  same 
length  of  time  before  us,  we  could  make  one  more  perfect.  Assuming  the 
justness  of  that  act,  the  bill  preserves  the  respective  propositions  for  which 
the  act  provides,  and  subjects  them  all  to  the  same  equal  but  moderate  re- 
duction, spread  over  the  long  space  of  nine  years.  The  senator  from 
Massachusetts  contends  that  a  great  part  of  the  value  of  all  protec- 
tion is  given  up  by  dispensing  with  specific  duties  and  the  principle  of 
discrimination.  But  much  the  most  valuable  articles  of  our  domestic 
manufactures  (cottons  and  woolens,  for  example),  have  never  enjoyed  the 
advantage  of  specific  duties.  They  have  always  been  liable  to  ad 
valorem  duties,  with  a  very  limited  application  of  the  minimum  principle. 
The  bill  does  not,  however,  even  after  1842,  surrender  either  mode  of  layiDg 
duties.  Discriminations  are  expressly  recognized  below  the  maximum,  and 
specific  duties  may  also  be  imposed,  provided  they  do  not  exceed  it. 

The  honorable  senator  also  contends  that  the  bill  is  imperfect,  and  that 
the  execution  of  it  will  be  impracticable.  He  asks,  how  is  the  excess  above 
twenty  per  centum  to  be  ascertained  on  coarse  and  printed  cottons  liable  to 
minimums  of  thirty  and  thirty-five  cents,  and  subject  to  a  duty  of  twenty- 
five  per  centum,  ad  valorem ;  and  how  it  is  to  be  estimated  in  the  case 
of  specific  duties  ?  Sir,  it  is  very  probable  that  the  bill  is  not  perfect,  but  I 
do  not  believe  that  there  is  any  thing  impracticable  in  its  execution.  Much 
will,  however,  depend  upon  the  head  of  the  treasury  department.  In  the  in- 
stance of  the  cotton  minimums,  the  statute  having,  by  way  of  exception  to 
the  general  ad  valorem  rule,  declared,  in  certain  cases,  how  the  value  shall 
be  estimated,  that  statutory  value  ought  to  govern ;  and  consequently,  the 
twenty  per  centum  should  be  exclusively  deducted  from  the  twenty-five  per 
centum,  being  the  rate  of  duties  to  which  cottons  generally  are  liable ;  and 
the  biennial  tenths  should  be  subtracted  from  the  excess  of  five  per  centum. 
"With  regard  to  specific  duties,  it  will,  perhaps,  be  competent  to  the  Secretary 


ON   THE   COMPROMISE   TARIFF.  563 

of  the  Treasury  in  the  execution  of  the  law,  for  the  sake  of  certainty,  to  adopt 
some  average  value,  founded  upon  importations  of  a  previous  year.  But  if 
the  value  of  each  cargo,  and  every  part  of  it,  is  to  be  ascertained,  it  would 
be  no  more  than  what  now  is  the  operation  in  the  case  of  woolens,  silks, 
cottons  above  thirty  and  thirty-five  cents,  and  a  variety  of  other  articles  ; 
and  consequently  there  would  be  no  more  impracticability  in  the  law. 

To  all  defects,  however,  real  or  imaginary,  which  it  may  be  supposed 
will  arise  in  the  execution  of  the  principle  of  the  bill,  I  oppose  one  conclus- 
ive, and,  I  hope,  satisfactory  answer.  Congress  will  be  in  session  one  whole 
month  before  the  commencement  of  the  law ;  and  if,  in  the  mean  time, 
omissions  calling  for  further  legislation  shall  be  discovered,  there  will  be 
more  time  then  than  we  have  now  to  supply  them.  Let  us,  on  this  occa- 
sion of  compromise,  pursue  the  example  of  our  fathers,  who,  under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  same  spirit,  in  the  adoption  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United 
States,  determined  to  ratify  it,  and  go  for  amendments  afterward. 

To  the  argument  of  the  senator  from   Massachusetts,  that  this   interest, 
and  that,  and  the  other,  can  not  be  sustained  under  the  protection,  beyond 
1842,  I  repeat  the  answer,  that  no  one  can  now  tell  what  may  then  be 
necessary.    That  period  will  provide  for  itself.     But  I  was  surprised  to  hear 
my  friend  singling  out  iron  as  an  article  that  would  be  most  injuriously 
affected  by  the  operation  of  this  bill.     If  I  am  not  greatly  mistaken  in 
my  recollection,  he  opposed  and  voted  against  the  act  of  1824,  because  of 
the  high  duty  imposed  on  iron.     But  for   that  duty  (and  perhaps  the  duty 
on  hemp),  which  he  then  considered  threw  an  unreasonable  burden  upon 
the  navigation  of  the  country,  he  would  have  supported  that  act.     Of  all 
the  articles  to  which  protecting  duties  are  applied,  iron,  and  the  manufac- 
tures of  iron,  enjoy  the  highest  protection.     During  the  term  of  nine  years, 
the  deductions  from  the  duty  are  not  such  as  seriously  to  impair  those  great 
interests,  unless  all  my  information  deceives  me  ;  and  beyond  that  period,  the 
remedy  has  been  already  indicated.     Let  me  suppose  that  the  anticipations 
which  I  form,  upon  the  restoration  of  concord  and  confidence,  shall  be  all 
falsified ;  that  neither  the  sense  of  fraternal  affection,  nor  common  justice, 
nor  even  common  interests,  will  lead  to  an  amicable  adjustment  of  the 
tariff  beyond  1842.     Let  me  suppose  the  period  has  arrived,  and  that  the 
provisions  of  the  bill  shall  be  interpreted  as  an  obligatory  pledge  upon  the 
Congress  of  that  day ;  and  let  me  suppose,  also,  that  a  greater  amount  of 
protection  than  the  bill  provides,  is  absolutely  necessary  to  some  interests  ; 
what  is  to  be  done  ?     Regarded  as  a  pledge,  it  does  not  bind  Congress  for- 
ever to  adhere  to  the  specific  rate  of  duty  contained  in  the  bill.     The  most, 
in  that  view,  that  it  exacts,  is,  to  make  a  fair  experiment.     If,  after  such 
experiment,  it  should  be  demonstrated,  that,  under  such  an  arrangement  of 
the  tariff,  the  interests  of  large  portions  of  the  Union  would  be  sacrificed, 
and  they  exposed  to  ruin,  Congress  will  be  competent  to  apply  some  remedy 
that  will  be  effectual ;  and  I  hope  and  believe  that,  in  such  a  contingency, 


564  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

some  will  be  devised  that  may  preserve  the  harmony  and  perpetuate 
the  blessings  of  the  Union. 

It  has  been  alleged,  that  there  will  be  an  augmentation,  instead  of  a 
diminution  of  revenue,  under  the  operation  of  this  bill.  I  feel  quite  con- 
fident of  the  reverse ;  but  it  is  sufficient  to  say,  that  both  contingences  are 
carefully  provided  for  in  the  bill,  without  affecting  the  protected  articles. 

The  gentleman  from  Massachusetts  dislikes  the  measure,  because  it  com- 
mands the  concurrence  of  those  who  have  been  hitherto  opposed,  in  regard 
to  the  tariff;  and  is  approved  by  the  gentleman  from  South  Carolina  (Mr. 
Calhoun),  as  well  as  by  myself.  Why,  sir,  the  gentleman  has  told  us  that 
he  is  not  opposed  to  any  compromise.  Will  he  be  pleased  to  say  how  any 
compromise  can  be  effected  without  a  concurrence  between  those  who 
had  been  previously  divided,  and  taking  some  medium  between  the  two 
extremes  ?  The  wider  the  division  may  have  been,  so  much  the  better  for 
the  compromise,  which  ought  to  be  judged  of  by  its  nature  and  by  its 
terms,  and  not  solely  by  those  who  happen  to  vote  for  it.  It  is  an  adjust- 
ment to  which  both  the  great  interests  in  this  country  may  accede  without 
either  being  dishonored.  The  triumph  of  neither  is  complete.  Each,  for 
the  sake  of  peace,  harmony,  and  union,  makes  some  concessions.  The 
South  has  contended  that  every  vestige  of  protection  should  be  eradicated 
from  the  statute-book,  and  the  revenue  standard  forthwith  adopted.  In 
assenting  to  this  bill,  it  waives  that  pretension — yields  to  reasonable  pro- 
tection for  nine  years ;  and  consents,  in  consideration  of  the  maximum  of 
twenty  per  centum,  to  be  subsequently  applied,  to  discriminations  below 
it,  cash  duties,  home  valuations,  and  a  long  list  of  free  articles.  The  North 
and  West  have  contended  for  the  practical  application  of  the  principle 
of  protection,  regulated  by  no  other  limit  than  the  necessary  wants  of  the 
country.  If  they  accede  to  this  adjustment,  they  agree,  in  consideration 
of  the  stability  and  certainty  which  nine  years'  duration  of  a  favorite 
system  of  policy  affords,  and  of  the  other  advantages  which  have  been 
enumerated,  to  come  down  in  1842  to  a  limit  not  exceeding  twenty  per 
centum.  Both  parties,  animated  by  a  desire  to  avert  the  evils  Avhich  might 
flow  from  carrying  out  into  all  their  consequences  the  cherished  system  of 
either,  have  met  upon  common  ground,  made  mutual  and  friendly  conces- 
sions, and,  I  trust,  and  sincerely  believe,  that  neither  will  have,  hereafter, 
occasion  to  regret,  as  neither  can  justly  reproach  the  other  with  what 
may  be  now  done. 

This,  or  some  other  measure  of  conciliation,  is  now  more  than  ever  ne- 
cessary, since  the  passage,  through  the  Senate,  of  the  enforcing  bill.  To 
that  bill,  if  I  had  been  present,  on  the  final  vote,  I  should  have  given  my 
assent,  although  with  great  reluctance.  I  believe  this  government  not  only 
possessed  of  the  constitutional  power,  but  to  be  bound  by  every  considera- 
tion, to  maintain  the  authority  of  the  laws.  But  I  deeply  regretted  the 
necessity  which  seemed  to  me  to  require  the  passage  of  such  a  bill.  And 
I  was  far  from  being  without  serious  apprehensions  as  to  the  consequences 


ON   THE    COMPROMISE   TARIFF.  565 

to  which  it  might  lead.  I  felt  no  new-born  zeal  in  favor  of  the  present 
administration,  of  which  I  now  think  as  I  have  always  thought.  I  could 
not  vote  against  the  measure  ;  I  would  not  speak  in  its  behalf.  I  thought 
it  most  proper  in  me  to  leave  to  the  friends  of  the  administration  and  to 
others,  who  might  feel  themselves  particularly  called  upon,  to  defend  and 
sustain  a  strong  measure  of  the  administration.  With  respect  to  the  series 
of  acts  to  which  the  executive  has  resorted,  in  relation  to  our  southern  dis- 
turbance, this  is  not  a  fit  occasion  to  enter  upon  a  full  consideration  of 
them  ;  but  I  will  briefly  say,  that,  although  the  proclamation  is  a  paper  of 
uncommon  ability  and  eloquence,  doing  great  credit,  as  a  composition,  to 
him  who  prepared  it,  and  to  him  who  signed  it,  I  think  it  contains  some 
ultra  doctrines  which  no  party  in  this  country  had  ventured  to  assert 
With  these  are  mixed  up  many  sound  principles  and  just  views  of  our 
political  systems.  If  it  is  to  be  judged  by  its  effects  upon  those  to  whom 
it  was  more  immediately  addressed,  it  must  be  admitted  to  have  been  ill- 
timed  and  unfortunate.  Instead  of  allaying  the  excitement  which  prevailed 
it  increased  the  exasperation  in  the  infected  district,  and  afforded  new  and 
unnecessary  causes  of  discontent  and  dissatisfaction  in  the  South  generally. 
The  message,  subsequently  transmitted  to  Congress,  communicating  the 
proceedings  of  South  Carolina,  and  calling  for  countervailing  enactments, 
was  characterized  with  more  prudence  aud  moderation.  And  if  this  un- 
happy contest  is  to  continue,  I  sincerely  hope,  that  the  future  conduct 
of  the  administration  may  be  governed  by  wise  and  cautious  counsels, 
and  a  parental  forbearance.  But  when  the  highest  degree  of  animosity 
exists ;  when  both  parties,  however  unequal,  have  arrayed  themselves  for 
the  conflict ;  who  can  tell  when,  by  the  indiscretion  of  subordinates,  or 
other  unforeseen  causes,  the  bloody  struggle  may  commence  ?  In  the  midst 
of  magazines,  who  knows  when  the  fatal  spark  may  produce  a  terrible  ex- 
plosion ?  And  the  battle  once  begun,  where  is  its  limit  ?  What  latitude 
will  circumscribe  its  rage  ?  Who  is  to  command  our  armies  ?  When,  and 
where,  and  how,  is  the  war  to  cease  ?  In  what  condition  will  the  peace 
leave  the  American  system,  the  American  Union,  and,  what  is  more  than 
all,  American  liberty  ?  I  can  not  profess  to  have  a  confidence,  which  I 
have  not,  in  this  administration,  but  if  I  had  all  confidence  in  it,  I  should 
still  wish  to  pause,  and,  if  possible,  by  any  honorable  adjustment,  to  pre- 
vent awful  consequences,  the  extent  of  which  no  human  wisdom  can  foresee. 
It  appears  to  me,  then,  Mr.  President,  that  we  ought  not  to  content  our- 
selves with  passing  the  enforcing  bill  only.  Both  that  and  the  bill  of  peace 
seem  to  me  to  be  required  for  the  good  of  our  country.  The  first  will 
satisfy  all  who  love  order  and  law,  and  disapprove  the  inadmissible  doc- 
trine of  nullification.  The  last  will  soothe  those  who  love  peace  and  con- 
cord, harmony  aud  union.  One  demonstrates  the  power  and  the  disposition 
to  vindicate  the  authority  and  supremacy  of  the  laws  of  the  Union ;  the 
other  offers  that  which,  if  it  be  accepted  in  the  fraternal  spirit  in  wmich 
it  is  tendered,  will  supersede  the  necessity  of  the  employment  of  all  force. 


566  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

There  are  some  who  say,  Let  the  tariff  go  down ;  let  our  manufactures 
be  prostrated,  if  such  be  the  pleasure,  at  another  session,  of  those  to  whose 
hands  the  government  of  this  country  is  confided ;    let  bankruptcy  and 
ruin  be  spread  over  the  land ;  and  let  resistance  to  the  laws,  at  all  hazards, 
be  subdued.     Sir,  they  take  counsel  from  their  passions.     They  anticipate  a 
terrible  reaction  from  the  downfall  of  the  tariff,  which  would  ultimately 
re-establish  it  upon  a  firmer  basis  than  ever.     But  it  is  these  very  agita- 
tions, these  mutual  irritations  between  brethren  of  the  same  family,  it  is  the 
individual  distress  and  general  ruin  that  would  necessarily  follow  the  over- 
throw of  the  tariff,  that  ought,  if  possible,  to  be  prevented.     Besides,  are 
we  certain   of  this  reaction?     Have  we  not  been  disappointed  in  it  as  to 
other  measures  heretofore  ?     But  suppose,  after  a  long  and  embittered  strug- 
gle, it  should  come,  in  what  relative  condition  would  it  find  the  parts  of 
this  confederacy  ?     In  what  state  our  ruined  manufactures  ?     When  they 
should  be  laid  low,  who,  amid  the  fragments  of  the  general  wreck,  scattered 
over  the  face  of  the  land,  would  have  courage  to  engage  in  fresh  enterprises, 
under  a  new  pledge  of  the  violated  faith  of  the  government  1      If  we 
adjourn,  without  passing  this  bill,  having  intrusted  the  executive  with  vast 
powers  to  maintain  the  laws,  should  he  be  able  by  the  next  session  to  put 
down  all  opposition  to  them,  will  he  not,  as  a  necessary  consequence  of  suc- 
cess, have  more  power  than  ever  to  put  down  the  tariff  also  ?     Has  he  not 
said  that  the  South  is  oppressed,  and  its  burdeus  ought  to  be  relieved  ?    And 
will  he  not  feel  himself  bound,  after  he  shall  have  triumphed,  if  triumph  he 
may,  in  a  civil  war,  to  appease  the  discontents  of  the  South  by  a  modifica- 
tion of  the  tariff,  in  conformity  with  its  wishes  and  demands  ?     No,  sir  ; 
no,  sir ;  let  us  save  the  country  from  the  most  dreadful   of  all  calamities, 
and  let  us  save  its  industry,  too,  from  threatened  destruction.     Statesmen 
should  regulate  their  conduct  and  adapt  their  measures  to  the  exigences  of 
the  times  in  which  they  live.     They  can  not,  indeed,  transcend  the  limits 
of  the  constitutional   rule ;  but  with  respect  to  those  systems  of  policy 
which  fall  within  its  scope,  they  should  arrange  them  according  to  the  in- 
terests, the  wants,  and  the  prejudices  of  the  people.     Two  great  dangers 
threaten  the  public  safety.     The  true  patriot  will  not  stop  to  inquire  how 
they  have  been  brought  about,  but  will  fly  to  the   deliverance  of   his 
country.     The  difference  between  the  friends  and  the  foes  of  the  compro- 
mise, under  consideration,  is,  that  they  w*ould,  in  the  enforcing  act,  send 
forth  alone  a  flaming  sword.     We  would  send  out  that  also,  but  along  with 
it  the  olive  branch,  as  a  messenger  of  peace.     They  cry  out,  The  law  !  the 
law  !  the  law  !     Power  !  power !  power !     We,  too,  reverence  the  law,  and 
bow  to  the  supremacy  of  its  obligations ;  but  we  are  in  favor  of  the   law 
executed  in  mildness,  and  of  power  tempered  with  mercy.     They,  as  we 
think,  would  hazard  a  civil  commotion,  beginning  in  South  Carolina,  and 
extending,  God  only  knows  where.     While  we  would  vindicate  the  federal 
government,  we  are  for  peace,  if  possible,  union,  and  liberty.     We  want  no 
war,  above  all,  no  civil  war,  no  family  strife.     We  want  to  see  no  sacked 


ON    THE    COMPROMISE    TARIFF.  567 

cities,  no  desolated  fields,  no  smoking  ruins,  no  streams  of  American  blood 
shed  by  American  arms  ! 

I  have  been  accused  of  ambition  in  presenting  tbis  measure.     Ambition  ! 
inordinate  ambition  !     If  I  bad   thought  of  myself  only,  I  should  have 
never  brought  it  forward.     I  know  well  the  perils  to  which  I  expose  my- 
self; the  risk  of  alienating  faithful  and  valued  friends,  with  but  little  pros- 
pect of  making  new  ones,  if  any  new  ones  could  compensate  for  the  loss 
of  those  whom  we  have  long  tried  and  loved  ;  and  the  honest  misconcep- 
tions both  of  friends  and  foes.     Ambition  !     If  I  had  listened  to  its  soft 
and  seducing  whispers ;  if  I  had  yielded  myself  to  the  dictates  of  a  cold, 
calculating,  and  prudential  policy,  I  would  have  stood  still  and  unmoved. 
I  might  even  have  silently  gazed  on  the  raging  storm,  enjoyed  its  loudest 
thunders,  and  left  those  who  are  charged  with  the  care  of  the  vessel   of 
state,  to  conduct  it  as  they  could.     I  have  been  heretofore  often  unjustly 
accused  of  ambition.     Low,  groveling  souls,  who  are  utterly  incapable  of 
elevating  themselves  to  the  higher  and  nobler  duties  of  pure  patriotism — 
beings,  who,  forever  keeping  their  own  selfish  aims  in  view,  decide  all  pub- 
lic measures  by  their  presumed  influence  on  their  aggrandizement — judjje 
me  by  the  venal  rule  which  they  prescribe  to  themselves.     I  have  given  to 
the  winds  those  false  accusations,  as  I  consign  that  which  now  impeaches 
my  motives.     I  have  no  desire  for  office,  not  even  the  highest.     The  most 
exalted  is  but  a  prison,  in  which  the  incarcerated  incumbent  daily  receives 
his  cold,  heartless  visitants,  marks  his  weary  hours,  and  is  cut  off  from  the 
practical  enjoyment  of  all  the  blessings  of  genuine  freedom.     I  am  no  can- 
didate for  any  office  in   the  gift  of  the  people  of  these  States,  united   or 
separated  ;  I  never  wish,  never  expect  to  be.     Pass  this  bill,  tranquilize  the 
country,  restore  confidence  and  affection  in  the  Union,  and  I  am  willing  to 
go  home  to  Ashland,  and  renounce  public  service  forever.     I  should   there 
find,  in  its  groves,  under  its  shades,  on  its  lawns,  amid  my  flocks  and  herds, 
in  the  bosom  of  my  family,  sincerity  and  truth,  attachment,  and  fidelity, 
and  gratitude,  which  I  have  not  always  found  in  the  walks  of  public  life. 
Yes,  I  have  ambition ;  but  it  is  the  ambition  of  being  the  humble  instru- 
ment, iu  the  hands  of  Providence,  to  reconcile  a  divided  people ;  once  more 
to  revive  concord  and  harmony  in  a  distracted  land — the  pleasing  ambition 
of  contemplating  the  glorious  spectacle  of  a  free,  united,  prosperous,  and 
fraternal  people ! 


THE    COMPKOMISE   TARIFF    (Continued). 

IN  SENATE,  MARCH  1,  1833. 

[A  bill  to  enforce  the  federal  laws  in  South  Carolina  had  be- 
come a  law.  Hence  the  propriety  of  the  healing  measure  of 
the  Compromise  Tariff.  The  following  concluding  remarks  of 
Mr.  Clay  on  this  important  measure,  though  few,  are  worthy  of 
record.] 

Mr.  Clay  then  said  a  few  words  in  reference  to  this  bill,  and  the  enforc- 
ing bill,  both  of  which  he  considered  that  it  was  necessary  to  send  forth, 
as  well  to  show  that  the  laws  must  be  executed,  as  that  there  is  a  disposi- 
tion to  make  concessions.  He  stated,  that  on  the  subject  of  the  govern- 
ment's being  a  compact,  he  principally  agreed  with  the  senator  from  South 
Carolina,  but  with  some  difference  as  to  the  character  of  the  right  conferred 
by  that  compact.  He  did  not  adopt  the  opinion,  that  there  had  been  any 
advance  made  in  usurpation  of  powers  by  the  general  government.  He 
then  went  into  a  view  of  the  history  of  this  system,  to  show  that,  twelve 
or  thirteen  years  ago,  there  was  no  opposition  raised  against  the  power  of 
Congress  to  protect  domestic  industry.  The  opposition  on  constitutional 
grounds  had  subsequently  grown  up.  He  then  stated  that,  in  his  opinion, 
no  State  could  so  practically  construe  the  Constitution  as  to  nullify  the 
laws  of  the  Uuited  States,  without  plunging  the  country  into  all  the 
miseries  of  anarchy.  He  said  that  be  adhered  to  the  doctrines  of  that 
ablest,  wisest,  and  purest  of  American  statesmen,  James  Madison,  who  still 
lives,  and  resides  in  Virginia — the  doctrines  which  were  advanced  by  him 
in  1799.  The  answer  of  that  distinguished  man  to  the  resolutions  of  the 
other  States,  and  his  address  to  the  people,  effected  a  sudden  revolution  of 
public  opinion.  The  people  rallied  around  him ;  the  alien  and  sedition 
laws  were  repealed ;  and  the  usurpations  of  the  general  government  were 
arrested.  He  viewed  the  government  as  federative  in  its  origin,  in  its  char- 
acter, and  in  its  operation,  and  under  the  clause  of  the  Constitution  which 
gives  to  Congress  power  to  pass  all  laws  to  carry  into  effect  the  granted 
powers,  they  could  pass  all  necessary  laws.  He  hoped  that  the  effect  of 
this  bill  would  conciliate  all  classes  and  all  sections  of  the  Union. 

He  did  not  arrogate  any  merit  for  the  passage  of  this  bill.  He  had 
cherished  this  system  as  a  favorite  child,  and  he  still  clung  to  it,  and 


ON    THE    COMPROMISE    TARIFF.  5G9 

should  still  cling  to  it.  Why  had  he  been  reproached  ?  He  had  come  to  the 
child  and  fouud  it  in  the  hands  of  the  Philistines,  who  were  desirous  to 
destroy  it.  He  wished  to  save  and  cherish  it,  and  to  find  for  it  better  and 
safer  nurses.  He  did  not  wish  to  employ  the  sword,  but  to  effect  Lis  object 
by  concession  and  conciliation.  He  wished  to  see  the  system  placed  on  a 
securer  basis,  to  plant  it  in  the  bosoms  and  affections  of  the  people.  The 
gentleman  from  Pennsylvania,  who  had  learned  his  views  of  the  system 
from  the  senator  from  South  Carolina,  had  spoken  of  him  as  the  pilot  who 
was  directing  the  vessel.  If  it  was  so,  he  would  ask  if  she  had  been  se- 
cured by  a  faithful  crew  ?  If  all  had  been  faithful,  he  believed  there  would 
have  been  no  danger  in  assailing  the  system.  He  assailed  no  one ;  he 
merely  defended  himself  against  the  reproaches  of  others. 

Auother  motive  with  him  was  to  preserve  the  Union.  He  feared  he 
saw  hands  uplifted  to  destroy  the  system;  he  saw  the  Union  endangered; 
and  in  spite  of  all  peril  which  might  assail  himself,  he  had  determined  to 
6tand  forward  and  attempt  the  rescue. 

He  felt  himself  pained  exceedingly  in  being  obliged  to  separate  on  the 
question,  from  valued  friends,  especially  from  his  friend  from  Massachusetts, 
whom  he  had  always  respected,  and  whom  he  still  respected.  He  then  re- 
plied to  the  argument  founded  on  the  idea  thatthe  protective  principle  had 
been  abandoned  by  this  bill.  He  admitted  that  protection  had  been  better 
secured  by  former  bills,  but  there  was  no  surrender  by  this.  He  considered 
revenue  as  the  first  object,  and  protection  as  the  second.  As  to  the  reduc- 
tion of  the  revenue,  he  was  of  opiuion  that  there  was  au  error  in  the  cal- 
culations of  gentlemen.  He  thought  that,  in  the  article  of  silks  alone,  there 
would  be  a  considerable  reduction.  The  protection  to  the  mechanic  arts 
was  only  reduced  by  the  whole  operation  of  the  bill  to  twenty-six  per  cen- 
tum, and  he  did  not  know  that  there  would  be  any  just  ground  for  com- 
plaint, as  some  of  the  mechanic  arts  now  enjoy  only  twenty-five  per 
centum. 

The  argument  of  the  senator  from  New  York  (Mr.  Wright)  was  against 
the  bill,  but  he  was  happy  to  find  his  vote  was  to  be  for  it.  If  his  argu- 
ment brought  other  minds  to  the  same  conclusion  to  which  it  had  brought 
his,  the  bill  would  not  be  in  any  danger.  He  would  say,  save  the  coun- 
try ;  save  the  Union  ;  and  save  the  American  system. 


ON  PRESIDENT  JACKSON'S  VETO  OF  THE 

LAND  BILL. 

IN"  SENATE,  DECEMBER  5,  1833. 

[Mr.  Clay's  Land  Bill  had  passed  both  Houses  of  Congress, 
on  the  1st  of  March,  1833,  by  majorities  sufficiently  large  to 
make  it  a  law  against  the  president's  veto,  or  to  make  it  proba- 
ble that  such  would  be  the  result  of  such  a  contingency.  But 
General  Jackson  did  not  return  the  bill,  but  put  it  in  his  pocket 
for  future  use.  On  the  4th  of  March  of  this  year,  the  Twenty- 
second  Congress  ceased  to  exist,  and  with  it  expired  the  first 
term  of  General  Jackson's  presidency.  Consequently,  it  was 
impossible  that  General  Jackson,  who  entered  on  his  second 
term  of  office  as  a  newly-elected  president,  the  4th  of  March, 
1833,  or  that  the  Twenty-third  Congress  which  came  in  on 
that  day,  could  either  of  them  constitutionally  enter  on  any  un- 
finished business  of  the  Twenty-second  Congress.  Nor  could  the 
Twenty-third  Congress  take  it  up,  except  de  novo.  The  Con- 
stitution prescribes,  that  a  bill  which  has  passed  both  Houses  of 
Congress,  if  not  approved  by  the  president,  shall  be  returned  by 
him  in  ten  days  to  the  House  in  which  it  originated,  with  his 
reasons.  But  the  same  Senate  which  originated  Mr.  Clay's 
Land  Bill  did  not  exist  after  the  3d  of  March,  1833.  The  bill, 
therefore,  was  evidently  dead,  and  General  Jackson  killed  it  by 
retaining  it  in  his  pocket,  and  not  returning  it  to  the  Senate  of 
the  Twenty-second  Congress.  Nevertheless,  General  Jackson,  a 
new  president,  being  in  his  second  term,  sent  back  the  bill  to 
the  new  Senate  of  the  Twenty-third  Congress,  with  his  reasons 
for  disapproving  it.  He  took  a  dead  carcass,  murdered  by  his 
own  hand,  and  flung  it  on  the  floor  of  the  Senate  of  the  United 
States  ! 

The  retaining  of  the  bill  was  an  unwarranted  assumption  of 
power,  which  would  have  been  tolerated  in  no  man  except  Gen- 
eral Jackson  ;  and  throwing  it  at  the  Senate  of  the  Twenty- 
third  Congress  was  an  insult  to  that  body,  which  could  not 
entertain^  and  which  had  no  right  to  touch  it.     It  would  have 


ON   PKESIDENT    JACKSON'S   VETO    OF    THE    LAND    BILL.        571 

"been  equally  proper  to  send  it  to  one  of  the  Houses  of  the  Brit- 
ish Parliament,  as  neither  they  nor  cither  House  of  the  Twenty- 
third  Congress  bad  anv  constitutional  connection  with  it.  It 
was  dead  also  in  General  Jackson's  hands,  after  the  3d  of  March, 
1833,  as  the  only  term  of  its  vitality  was  ten  days  after  it  was 
handed  to  the  president,  during  which  term,  if  the  same  Con- 
gress had  continued,  and  the  same  president  heen  in  the  chair, 
it  should  have  been  approved,  or  returned  with  a  veto  ;  or  if 
neither  approved  nor  returned,  it  would  pass  into  law  sub  silentis. 
If,  however,  Congress  adjourns  before  ten  days,  it  can  not  be- 
come a  law  ;  and  if  the  president  neither  approves  nor  returns 
it  before  the  adjournment  that  happens  within  ten  days,  it  is  of 
course  dead.  The  Twenty-second  Congress,  however,  did  not 
adjourn  in  this  case  ;  but  it  expired  on  the  3d  of  March,  which 
might  possibly  raise  the  question,  whether  the  bill,  not  having 
been  approved  or  returned,  did  not  become  a  law  ;  but  it  could 
not  raise  the  question,  whether  General  Jackson,  in  his  second 
term  of  office,  had  any  right  to  touch  it.  If  the  bill  did  not 
become  a  law  in  consequence  of  his  neglect  of  it  during  his  first 
term,  it  was  dead. 

All  these  things  were  perfectly  well  known  to  General  Jack- 
son, and  yet  he  pocketed  the  bill,  and  returned  it  to  the  Senate 
of  the  Twenty-third  Congress,  a  new  body,  himself  a  newly- 
elected  president,  and  therefore  not  the  same  official  to  whom 
the  bill  was  sent,  although  the  same  person.] 

This  measure  had  been  first  introduced  into  Congress  at  the  session  be- 
fore the  last,  under  circumstances  which  must  be  within  the  recollection  of 
every  member  of  the  Senate.  Its  object  was,  to  dispose  of  the  proceeds  of 
the  public  lands  for  a  limited  time.  The  subject  had  been  greatly  discussed 
not  only  in  Congress,  but  throughout  the  country.  The  principles  and 
provisions  of  the  bill  were  well  and  generally  understood.  The  subject  had 
attracted  the  attention  of  the  chief  magistrate  himself,  and  this  bill  was 
made  the  subject  of  commentary  in  his  message  at  the  commencement  of 
the  last  session  of  Congress.  It  must,  therefore,  be  considered  as  a  subject 
perfectly  well  understood  by  the  president,  for  it  was  not  to  be  supposed 
that  he  would  have  commented  upon  it,  and  recommended  it  to  the  atten- 
tion of  Congress,  if  it  had  not  been  understood.  During  the  last  session, 
this  bill,  which  had  previously  beeu  before  the  House,  was  introduced  in 
this  body,  and  was  passed,  and  sent  to  the  other  House,  whence  it  was 
returned  with  a  slight  amendment,  taking  away  the  discretion  which  had 
been  vested  in  the  State  Legislatures  as  to  the  disposal  of  the  proceeds- 
This  bill,  which   had  been  before  Congress   the  session,  before  tho  last, 


572  SPEECHES   OF    HENKY    CLAY. 

which  had  passed  at  the  last  session,  having  been  before  the  country  for 
a  whole  year,  when  it  passed  the  two  Houses,  was  placed  before  the  ex- 
ecutive,  with  a  number  of  other  measures,  just  before  the  close  of  the  last 
Congress.  As  the  subject  had  been  before  the  president  for  consideration 
so  long  previously  to  the  passage  of  the  bill,  and  he  had  reflected  upon 
it,  it  was  not  to  have  been  expected  that  he  would  take  advantage  of  the 
shortness  of  the  session  to  retain  the  bill  until  this  time.  Yet  such 
had  been  the  fact,  and  a  proceeding  had  taken  place  which  was  unpre- 
cedented and  alarming,  and  which,  unless  the  people  of  this  country 
were  lost  to  all  sense  of  what  was  due  to  the  legislative  branch  of  the  gov- 
ernment, to  themselves,  and  to  those  principles  of  liberty  which  had  been 
transmitted  to  tliein  from  the  Revolution,  they  would  not  tolerate.  It  was 
at  least  due  to  the  Legislature,  that  the  president  should  have  sent  a  few 
lines,  courteously  informing  them,  that  when  his  own  mind  was  made  up 
he  would  communicate  the  result.  But,  without  deigning  to  make  known 
his  intention,  or  to  impart  the  reasons  which  influenced  him,  he  despotically 
kept  silence,  and  retained  the  bill.  He  begged  leave  to  congratulate  the 
Senate  on  the  return  of  the  bill.  The  question  Avhich  now  presented  it- 
self was,  whether  the  bill  was  dead,  in  consequence  of  the  non-action  of 
the  president,  or  whether  it  had  become  an  existing  law.  He  was  not 
now  about  to  discuss  that  question  ;  but  he  had  felt  himself  called  on  to 
make  a  few  observations  on  the  extraordinary  course,  and  to  say  that  it 
was  due  to  Congress,  to  the  people,  and  to  the  executive  himself,  to  have 
informed  the  last  Congress  in  reference  to  this  subject,  concerning  which 
he  must  have  made  up  his  mind.  He  would  now  move  to  lay  this  bill  on 
the  table,  and  would  afterward  give  notice  of  a  day  when  he  should  ask 
leave  to  bring  in  a  bill  in  order  to  submit  it  again  to  the  action  of  the 
Senate. 

Mr.  Kane  wished  to  know  if  it  was  the  intention  of  the  senator  from 
Kentucky  that  the  bill  should  lie  permanently  on  the  table,  or  only  to  be 
called  up  at  an  early  day. 

Mr.  Clay  replied  that  the  only  alternative  was  to  consider  the  bill  as 
defunct,  or  as  an  existing  law.  If  the  gentleman  from  Illinois  could  point 
out  any  other  course,  he  had  read  some  clause  in  the  Constitution  which 
he  (Mr.  Clay)  had  never  been  so  fortunate  as  to  find. 

Mi-.  Benton  said  he  would  wish  to  make  a  remark ;  and,  if  he  was  pre- 
cluded by  the  pi-essing  of  this  question,  he  would  find  some  other  oppor- 
tunity of  making  it. 

The  question  was  then  taken  on  the  motion  to  lay  the  bill  upon  the 
table,  and  decided  in  the  affirmative — ayes  nineteen. 

Mr.  Benton  then  moved  to  take  up  the  message  for  consideration 

After  further  discussion,  Mr.  Clay  said  he  did  not  rise  to  reply  to  any 
one  who  had  felt  himself  called  upon  to  rise  in  the  Senate  to  vindicate  the 
president.  If  there  were  any  such  member,  he  did  not  wish  to  disturb 
him  in  his  office  of  vindicator  of  the  president,  or  to  affect  the  complacency 


ON   PKESIDENT    JACKSON'S    VETO    OF    THE    LAND    BILL.        573 

with  which  he  might  regard  his  vindication.  But  he  (Mr.  Clay)  stood  here 
to  sustain  his  own  course,  to  vindicate  the  Constitution,  and  to  vindicate 
the  rights  of  Congress  under  it.  And  he  must  repeat,  that  the  withhold- 
ing of  the  land  bill,  at  the  last  session,  under  the  circumstances  of  the 
case,  was  a  violation  of  the  Constitution,  and  disrespectful  to  the  Senate. 
What  were  the  circumstances  ? 

At  two  different  sessions  of  Congress,  the  land  subject  was  before  it. 
At  that  which  preceded  the  last,  a  bill  had  been  introduced  to  distribute 
among  the  States  the  proceeds  of  the  public  lands.  The  whole  subject,  by 
the  bill  and  by  reports  of  committees,  was  laid  before  Congress  and  spread 
before  the' country.  A  copy  of  the  bill,  when  it  was  first  introduced,  ac- 
cording to  the  constant  practice  of  Congress,  was  sent  to  the  president. 
He  was  thus,  as  well  as  the  country  generally,  put  in  entire  possession  of 
the  matter.  It  attracted  great  public  attention.  It  engaged  that  of  the 
president.  And,  accordingly,  at  the  commencement  of  the  last  session,  in 
his  annual  message,  he  adverted  to  it,  in  a  manner  which  evidently  showed 
that  the  writer  of  the  message  fully  understood  it,  and  all  the  views  which 
had  been  developed  about  it. 

[Here  Mr.  Clay  read  the  message  of  the  last  session,  so  far  as  it  related  to 
the  public  lands,  to  show  that  the  president  had  himself  invited  the  attention 
of  Congress  to  it,  as  one  of  urgent  and  pressing  importance ;  that  the  discretion 
of  Congress  to  make  any  disposition  of  the  public  lands,  which  they  might 
deem  best  for  the  harmony,  union,  and  interest  of  the  United  States,  was  un- 
controlled ;  that  the  question  ought  speedily  to  be  settled ;  and  that  the  presi- 
dent had  considered,  but  objected  to  the  bill  of  the  previous  session,  proposing, 
as  a  substitute,  a  plan  of  his  own,  which,  while  the  message  on  the  table  argued 
that  the  public  lands  belonged  to  all  the  States,  proposed  to  give  the  unsold 
lands  to  some  of  them.] 

Thus  was  Congress,  at  the  commencement  of  the  last  session,  officially 
invited  to  act,  and  to  act  speedily,  respectiug  the  public  lands  ;  and  thus 
did  the  president  manifest  his  knowledge  of  the  provisions  of  the  bill  of 
the  previous  session.  Well,  sir,  Congress  again  took  up  the  question. 
The  identical  bill  of  the  previous  session  was  again  introduced,  and  again, 
prior  to  its  passage,  placed  before  the  president,  along  with  the  other 
printed  documents,  according  to  standing  usage.  And  it  was  passed  by 
both  Houses,  substantially  in  the  shape  in  which  at  the  previous  session  it 
was  passed  by  the  Senate,  except  that  the  restriction  as  to  the  power  of 
the  States  to  supply  the  sum  to  be  distributed  among  the  several  States, 
after  the  deduction  of  the  twelve  and  a  half  per  centum  first  set  apart  for 
the  new  States,  was  stricken  out. 

In  this  form,  the  bill  was  laid  before  the  president  on  the  2d  day  of 
March  last.  It  was  no  stranger,  but  an  old  acquaintance.  He  had  seen  it 
repeatedly  before ;  and  he  must  have  been  well  informed  as  to  its  progress 
in  Congress.     He  had  commented  on  the  very  project  contained  in  the 


574  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

bill,  when  be  bad  brought  forward  his  own  in  his  message,  at  the  opening 
of  the  session.  Without  deiffninsf  to  communicate  to  Congress  what  dis- 
position  he  had  made,  or  meant  to  make  of  it,  he  permitted  the  body  to 
rise,  in  utter  ignorance  of  his  intentions. 

It  may  be  true  that  there  was  a  great  press  of  business  on  the  president 
on  the  2d  of  March,  and  that  he  may  have  acted  upon  some  ninety  or 
one  hundred  bills.  But  this  is  what  occurs  with  every  president  on  the 
day  before  the  termination  of  the  short  session  of  Congress.  With  most 
of  those  bills  the  president  must  have  been  less  acquainted  than  he  was 
with  the  land  bill.  Of  some  of  them  he  probably  had  never  heard  at  all. 
Not  one  of  them  possessed  the  importance  of  the  land  bill.  How  did  it 
happen  that  the  president  could  find  time  to  decide  on  so  many  new  bills, 
and  yet  had  not  time  to  examine  and  dispose  of  one  which  bad  long  been 
before  him  and  the  public  ;  one  embracing  a  subject  which  he  thought 
the  union,  harmony,  and  interests  of  the  States  required  should  be  speedily 
adjusted  ;  one  which  he  himself  had  pronounced  his  judgment  upon  at 
the  commencement  of  the  session  ?  By  withholding  the  bill,  the  president 
took  upon  himself  a  responsibility  beyond  the  exercise  of  the  veto.  He 
deprived  Congress  altogether  of  its  constitutional  right  to  act  upon  the  bill, 
and  to  pass  it,  his  negative  notwithstanding. 

The  president  is,  by  the  Constitution,  secured  time  to  consider  bills 
which  shall  have  passed  both  branches  of  Congress.  But  so  is  Congress 
equally  secured  the  right  to  act  upon  bills  which  they  have  passed,  and 
which  the  president  may  have  thought  proper  to  reject.  If  he  exercises 
his  veto,  and  returns  the  bill,  two  thirds  may  pass  it.  But  if  he  withholds 
the  bill,  it  can  not  become  a  kvw,  even  although  the  two  Houses  should  be 
unanimously  in  its  favor. 

Mr.  Clay  denied  that  the  Constitution  gave  to  the  president  ten  days  to 
consider  bills,  except  at  the  long  session.  At  that  session  the  period  of  its 
termination  is  uncertain,  and  dependent  upon  the  will  of  Congress.  To 
guard  against  a  sudden  adjournment,  by  which  the  president  might  be  de- 
prived of  due  time  to  deliberate  on  an  important  bill,  the  Constitution  pro- 
vides for  ten  days  at  that  session.  But,  at  the  short  session,  it  is  not  an 
adjournment,  but  a  dissolution  of  Congress,  on  the  3d  of  March,  and  the 
day  of  that  dissolution  is  fixed  in  the  Constitution  itself,  and  known  to  all. 

Mr.  Clay  contended,  therefore,  that  the  act  of  withholding  the  bill  was 
arbitrary  and  unconstitutional,  by  which  Congress,  and  the  Senate  espe- 
cially, in  which  the  bill  originated,  were  deprived  of  their  constitutional 
right  of  passing  on  the  bill,  after  the  president  had  exercised  his  powers. 
Respect  to  Congress  required  of  the  president,  if  he  really  had  not  time  to 
form  a  judgment  on  the  bill,  or,  having  formed  it,  had  not  time  to  lay  his 
reasons  before  the  body,  a  communication  to  that  effect.  But,  without 
condescending  to  transmit  one  word  upon  the  subject  to  Congress,  he  suf- 
fered the  session  to  terminate,  and  the  members  to  go  home  destitute  of  all 
information,  until  this  day,  of  his  intentions. 

Mr.  Benton  then  withdrew  his  motion  to  take  up  the  bill. 


ON  THE  REMOVAL   OF   THE  DEPOSITS 

IN  SENATE,  DECEMBER  26,  1833. 

[History  is  philosophy  teaching  by  example.  This  maxim 
has  great  force  in  application  to  the  facts  which  constitute  the 
subject  of  the  following  speech.  The  liberties  of  the  country 
never  came  so  near  a  wreck  as  when  General  Jackson  removed 
the  deposits  from  the  Bank  of  the  United  States,  and  the 
American  people  will  never  know  their  obligations  to  Mr.  Clay 
for  stepping  forward  on  this  occasion,  and  rebuking,  as  he  did, 
this  alarming  assumption  of  power.  The  following  speech  is 
now  history,  and  it  is  almost  incredible.  General  Jackson  had 
gained  an  irresistible  ascendency  over  the  minds  of  the  people, 
and  he  wanted  that  balance  of  character  which  is  required  to 
use  it  for  the  best  ends.  His  first  election  was  a  triumph,  and 
his  second  election  seated  him  firm  in  the  seat  of  power.  He 
was  giddy  in  his  elevation,  and  knew  that  he  could  do  what  he 
pleased  ;  and  he  set  out  to  do  it  with  a  strong  hand.  Neither 
the  Constitution  nor  the  laws  could  stand  in  his  way,  and  they 
snapped  like  threads  before  his  will.  Mr.  Clay  was  the  only 
man  that  could  stand  up  in  the  Senate  of  the  nation,  and  de- 
pict these  enormities  as  they  deserved.  True,  General  Jackson 
was  not  the  man  to  heed  advice  from  that  quarter,  delivered  in 
such  terms,  if  he  had  not  gone  too  far,  and  shocked  the  sense 
of  the  nation,  and  if  there  had  not  been  those  about  him  who 
could  have  some  influence  in  checking  and  modifying  his  violent 
passions.  This  speech  of  Mr.  Clay,  simply  because  it  was  true, 
told  with  tremendous  power,  not  only  on  General  Jackson,  indi- 
rectly through  that  public  opinion  on  which  it  acted  to  arrest 
his  career  of  usurpation  ;  but  it  told  also  with  not  less  effect  on 
the  man  who  consented  to  be  the  tool  of  this  outrage  on  the 
Constitution  and  laws  ;  and  it  will  never  be  forgotten,  that  he 
who  has  officiated  as  Chief  Justice  of  the  United  States  for  a 
quarter  of  a  century,  purchased  that  high  dignity  by  having  ob- 
sequiously bowed  himself  to  the  order  of  a  master  !     He,  whose 


576  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

first  act  in  the  public  service  was  a  violation  of  the  Constitution 
and  the  law?,  was  put  at  the  head  of  a  bench  which  was  or- 
dained to  judge  of  the  Constitution  and  laws  for  all  the  people 
of  the  United  S  !     And  he  was  put  there  because  he  him- 

self had  been  a  violator  of  both  !  In  this  may  be  seen  how  the 
very  fountain  of  justice  is  open  to  corruption  by  bribery.  It  is 
not  denk  Justice  Taney  may  have  adorned  his  posi- 

-  the  head  of  the  federal  judiciary,  nor  that  he  has  not 
generally  discharged  his  duties  with  fidelity.  Possibly  this  speech 
of  Mr.  Clay  may  have  had  a  salutary  influence  upon  him.  For, 
if  otherwise  fit  for  the  place  he  has  so  long  filled,  he  must  have 
been  well  endowed  with  qualities  to  profit  by  the  lecture  that 
was  read  to  him  in  the  Senate  of  the  United  States.  December 
26.  1833,  and  which  from  that  time  has  been  ringing  in  his  ears. 
But  the  great  fact,  that  he  purchased  that  high  cfhce  by  one  of 
the  most  "  i  lent  outrages  on  the  Constitution  and  laws  of  the 
Unit       £  an  never  be  obliterated  from  history,  so  long  as 

the  following  speech  of  Mr.  Clay  constitutes  a  part  of  history. 
It  is  true  tb  ief  Justice  Taney  was  then  only  Secretary  of 

the  Treasury  ;  but  it  is  equally  well  known  that  he  was  made 
Chief  Justi  ause  he  consented  to  remove  the  depos:  - 

The  influence  of  this  speech,  and  of  other  similar  efforts  of 
Mr.  C 1  -.  in  arresting  the  mad  career  of  General  Jackson,  and 
saving  the  country  from  impending  calamities,  can  never  be 
known  ;  but  it  v  and  wide-spread,  and  will  never  cease 

to  be  instructive  as  a  matter  of  history.] 

Res  *  late  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  because  he 
we.  sense  of  his  own  duty,  remove  the  money  of  the 
United  E  bank  of  I  States  and  its  branches, 
in  c  aid  by  appohr  r  to 
effe  been  done,  the  presiden:  -umed  the  exer- 
cise of  a  t  I  States  not  granted  to  him  by 
the  I  .erous  to  the  liberties  of  the  people. 

:ed  by  the  J  7  of  the  Treasury  for  the 

removal  of  the  n  i  United  S    1                     i  in  the  bank  of  the  United 

States  and  communicated  to  Cv  n  the  3d  of  December.  1833, 
are  uns ...             y  and 

We  are  in  the  midst  of  a  revolution,  hitherto  bloodless,  but  rapidly 
tending  toward  a  total  change  of  the  pure  republican  character  of  the  gov- 
ernment, and  to  the  concentration  of  all  power  in  the  hands  of  one  man. 
The  power-  I  ogress  are  paralyzed,  except  when  exerted  in  conformity 
with  his  will,  by  frequent  and  an  extraordinary  exercise  of  the  executive 


ON    THE    REMOVAL    OF    THE    DEPOSIT  B  577 

veto,  not  anticipated  by  the  founders  of  our  Constitution,  and  not  practiced 
by  any  of  the  predecessors  of  the  present  chief  magistrate.  And,  to  cramp 
them  still  more,  a  new  expedient  is  springing  into  use,  of  withholding  alto 
gether  bills  which  have  received  the  sanction  of  both  Houses  of  Congress, 
thereby  cutting  off  all  opportunity  of  passing  them,  even  if,  after  their 
return,  the  members  should  be  unanimous  in  their  favor.  The  constitu- 
tional participation  of  the  Senate  in  the  appointing  power  is  virtually  abol- 
ished by  the  constant  -  :he  power  of  removal  from  office,  without  any 
known  cause,  and '  by  the  appointment  of  the  same  individual  to  the  same 
office  after  his  i  a  by  the  Senate.     How  often  have  we,  senators,  felt 

that  the  check  of  the  Senate,  instead  of  being,  as  the  Constitution  intended, 
a  salutaiy  control,  was  an  idle  ceremony  \  How  often,  when  acting  on  the 
case  of  the  nominated  successor,  have  we  felt  the  injustice  of  the  removal  ? 
How  often  have  we  said  to  each  other,  well,  what  can  we  do  \  the  office 
can  not  remain  vacant  without  prejudice  to  the  public  interest,  and,  if  we 
reject  the  proposed  substitute,  we  can  not  restore  the  displaced ;  and,  per- 
haps, some  more  unworthy  man  may  be  nominated. 

The  judiciary  has  not  been  exempt  from  the  prevailing  rage  for  innova- 
tion. Decisions  of  the  tribunals,  deliberately  pronounced,  have  been  con- 
temptuously disregarded.  And  the  sanctity  of  numerous  tre  i  -  -  openly 
violated.  Our  Indian  relations,  coeval  with  the  existence  of  the  govern- 
ment, and  recognized  and  established  by  numerous  laws  and  treaties,  have 
been  subverted,  the  rights  of  the  helpless  and  unfortunate  aborigines 
trampled  in  the  dust,  and  they  brought  under  subjection  to  unknown  laws, 
in  which  they  have  no  voice,  promulgated  in  an  unknown  language.  The 
most  extensive  and  most  valuable  public  domain  that  ever  fell  to  the  lot  of 
one  nation,  is  threatened  with  a  total  sacrifice.  The  general  currency  of 
the  countrv — the  lite-blood  of  all  its  business — is  in  the  most  imminent 
danger  of  universal  disorder  and  confusion.  The  power  of  internal  im- 
provement lies  crushed  beneath  the  veto.  The  system  of  protection  of 
American  industry  was  snatched  from  impending  destruction  at  the  last 
session ;  but  we  are  now  coolly  told  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury, 
without  a  blush,  "that  it  is  understood  to  be  conceded  on  all  hands,  that 
the  tariff  for  protection  merely  is  to  be  finally  abandoned."  By  the  3d  of 
March,  1837,  if  the  progress  of  innovation  continues,  there  will  be  scarcely 
a  vestige  remaining  of  the  government  and  its  policy,  as  they  existed  prior 
to  the  3d  of  March,  1829.  In  a  term  of  eight  years,  a  little  more  than 
equal  to  that  which  was  required  to  establish  our  liberties,  the  government 
will  have  been  transformed  into  an  elective  monarchy — the  worst  of  all 
forms  of  government. 

Such  is  a  melancholy  but  faithful  picture  of  the  present  condition  of 
our  public  affairs.  It  is  not  sketched  or  exhibited  to  excite,  here  or  else- 
where, irritated  feeling.  I  have  no  such  purpose.  I  would,  on  the  con- 
trary, implore  the  Senate  and  the  people  to  discard  all  passion  and  prejudice, 
and  to  look  calmly,  but  resolutely,  upon  the  actual  state  of  the  Constitution 

37 


578  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY   CLAY. 

and  tne  country.  Although  I  bring  into  the  Senate  the  same  unabated 
spirit,  and  the  same  firm  determination  which  have  ever  guided  me  in  the 
support  of  civil  liberty,  and  the  defense  of  our  Constitution,  I  contemplate 
the  prospect  before  us  with  feelings  of  deep  humiliation  and  profound 
mortification. 

It  is  not  among  the  least  unfortunate  symptoms  of  the  times,  that  a 
large  portion  of  the  good  and  enlightened  men  of  the  Union,  of  all  par- 
ties, are  yielding  to  sentiments  of  despondency.  There  is,  unhappily,  a 
feeling  of  distrust  and  insecurity  pervading  the  community.  Many  of  our 
best  citizens  entertain  serious  apprehensions,  that  our  Union  and  our  insti- 
tutions are  destined  to  a  speedy  overthrow.  Sir,  I  trust  that  the  hopes 
and  confidence  of  the  country  will  revive.  There  is  much  occasion  for 
manly  independence  and  patriotic  vigor,  but  none  for  despair.  Thank 
God,  we  are  yet  free ;  and,  if  we  put  on  the  chains  which  are  forgeing 
for  us,  it  will  be  because  we  deserve  to  wear  them.  We  should  never  de- 
spair of  the  republic.  If  our  ancestors  had  been  capable  of  surrendering 
themselves  to  such  ignoble  sentiments,  our  independence  and  our  liberties 
would  never  have  been  achieved.  The  winter  of  1776-7  was  one  of  the 
gloomiest  periods  of  the  Revolution  ;  but  on  this  day,  fifty-seven  years  ago, 
the  father  of  his  country  achieved  a  glorious  victoiy,  which  diffused  joy  and 
gladness  and  animation  throughout  the  States.  Let  us  cherish  the  hope 
that,  since  he  has  gone  from  among  us,  Providence,  in  the  dispensation  of 
his  mercies,  has  near  at  hand  in  reserve  for  us,  though  yet  unseen  by  us, 
some  sure  and  happy  deliverance  from  all  impending  dangers. 

When  we  assembled  here  last  year,  we  were  full  of  dreadful  forebodings. 
On  the  one  hand  we  were  menaced  with  a  civil  war,  which,  lighted  up  in 
a  single  State,  might  spread  its  flames  throughout  one  of  the  largest  sec- 
tions of  the  Union.  On  the  other,  a  cherished  system  of  policy,  essential 
to  the  successful  prosecution  of  the  industry  of  our  countrymen,  was  ex- 
posed to  imminent  danger  of  immediate  destruction.  Means  were  happily 
applied  by  Congress  to  avert  both  calamities ;  the  country  was  reconciled, 
and  our  Union  once  more  became  a  band  of  friends  and  brothers.  And  I 
shall  be  greatly  disappointed,  if  we  do  not  find  those  who  were  denounced 
as  being  unfriendly  to  the  continuance  of  our  confederacy,  among  the  fore- 
most to  fly  to  its  preservation,  and  to  resist  all  executive  encroachment. 

Mr.  President,  when  Congress  adjourned,  at  the  termination  of  the  last 
session,  there  was  one  remnant  of  its  powers,  that  over  the  purse,  left  un- 
touched. The  two  most  important  powers  of  civil  government  are,  those  of 
the  sword  and  the  purse.  The  first,  with  some  restriction,  is  confided  by 
the  Constitution  to  the  executive,  and  the  last  to  the  legislative  department. 
If  they  are  separate,  and  exercised  by  different  responsible  departments, 
civil  liberty  is  safe ;  but  if  they  are  united  in  the  hands  of  the  same  in- 
dividual, it  is  gone.  That  clear-sighted  and  sagacious  revolutionary  orator 
and  patriot,  Patrick  Henry,  justly  said,  in  the  Virginia  convention,  in  reply 
to  one  of  his  opponents  : 


ON   THE    REMOVAL   OF   THE   DEPOSITS.  579 

"  Let  Mm  candidly  tell  me  where  and  when  did  freedom  exist,  when  the  sword 
and  purse  were  given  up  from  the  people  ?  Unless  a  miracle  in  human  affairs 
interposed,  no  nation  ever  retained  its  liberty  after  the  loss  of  the  sword  and  the 
purse.  Can  you  prove  by  any  augmentative  deduction,  that  it  is  possible  to  be 
safe  without  one  of  them  ?     If  you  give  them  up  you  are  gone." 

Up  to  the  period  of  the  termination  of  the  last  session  of  Congress,  the 
exclusive  constitutional  power  of  Congress  over  the  treasury  of  the  United 
States  had  never  been  contested.  Among  its  earliest  acts  was  one  to  estab- 
lish the  treasury  department,  which  provided  for  the  appointment  of  a 
treasurer  who  was  required  to  give  bond  and  security  in  a  very  large 
amount,  "  to  receive  and  keep  the  money  of  the  United  States,  and  to  dis- 
burse the  same,  upon  warrants  drawn  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury, 
countersigned  by  the  comptroller,  recorded  by  the  register,  and  not  other- 
wise." Prior  to  the  establishment  of  the  present  bank  of  the  United 
States,  no  treasury  or  place  had  been  provided  and  designated  by  lawr  for 
the  safe-keeping  of  the  public  moneys,  but  the  treasurer  was  left  to  his  own 
discretion  and  responsibility.  When  the  existing  bank  was  established,  it 
was  provided  that  the  public  moneys  should  be  deposited  with  it,  and  con- 
sequently that  bank  became  the  treasury  of  the  United  States.  For  what- 
ever place  is  designated  by  law  for  the  keeping  of  the  public  money  of 
the  United  States,  under  the  care  of  the  treasurer  of  the  United  States,  is 
for  the  time  being  the  treasury.  Its  safety  was  drawn  in  question  by  the 
chief  magistrate,  and  an  agent  was  appointed,  a  little  more  than  a  year 
ago,  to  investigate  its  ability.  He  reported  to  the  executive,  that  it  was 
perfectly  safe.  His  apprehensions  of  its  solidity  were  communicated  by 
the  president  to  Congress,  and  a  committee  was  appointed  to  examine  the 
subject.  They,  also,  reported  in  favor  of  its  security.  And,  finally,  among 
the  last  acts  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  prior  to  the  close  of  the 
last  session,  was  the  adoption  of  a  resolution,  manifesting  its  entire  confi- 
dence in  the  ability  and  solidity  of  the  bank. 

After  all  these  testimonies  to  the  perfect  safety  of  the  public  moneys,  in 
the  place  appointed  by  Congress,  who  could  have  supposed  that  the  place 
would  have  been  changed  ?  Who  could  have  imagined,  that  within  sixty 
days  of  the  meeting  of  Congress,  and,  as  it  were,  in  utter  contempt  of  its 
authority,  the  change  should  have  been  ordered  ?  Who  would  have 
dreamed,  that  the  treasurer  should  have  thrown  away  the  single  key  to  the 
treasury,  over  which  Congress  held  ample  control,  and  accepted  in  lieu  of 
it  some  dozens  of  keys,  over  which  neither  Congress  nor  he  has  any  ade- 
quate control  ?  Yet,  sir,  all  this  has  been  done  ;  and  it  is  now  our  solemn 
duty  to  inquire,  first  by  whose  authority  it  has  been  ordered  ?  and, 
secondly,  whether  the  order  has  been  given  in  conformity  with  the  Con- 
stitution and  laws  of  the  United  States  ? 

I  agree,  sir,  and  I  am  happy  whenever  I  can  agree  with  the  president,  as 
to  the  immense  importance  of  these  questions.  He  says,  in  a  paper  which 
I  hold  in  my  hand,  that  he  looks  upon  the  pending  question  as  involving 


580  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

higher  consideration  than  the  "  mere  transfer  of  a  sum  of  money  from  one 
bank  to  another.  Its  decision  may  affect  the  character  of  our  government 
for  ages  to  come."  And  with  him,  I  view  it  as  of  transcendent  importance, 
both  in  its  consequences  and  the  great  principles  which  the  question  in- 
volves. In  the  view  which  I  have  taken  of  this  subject,  I  hold  the  bank 
as  nothing,  as  perfectly  insignificant,  faithful  as  it  has  been  in  the  perform- 
ance of  ail  its  duties,  efficient  as  it  has  proved  in  regulating  the  currency, 
than  which  there  is  none  in  all  Christendom  so  sound,  and  deep  as  is  the 
interest  of  the  country  in  the  establishment  and  continuance  of  a  sound 
currency,  and  the  avoidance  of  all  those  evils  which  result  from  a  defective 
or  unsettled  currency.  All  these  I  regard  as  questions  of  no  importance, 
in  comparison  with  the  principles  involved  in  this  executive  innovation.  It 
involves  the  distribution  of  power  by  the  executive,  and  the  taking  away  a 
power  from  Congress  which  it  was  never  before  doubted  to  possess — the 
power  over  the  public  purse.  Entertaining  these  views,  I  shall  not,  to-day, 
at  least,  examine  the  reasons  assigned  by  the  president,  or  by  the  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury ;  for  if  the  president  had  no  power  to  perform  the  act,  no 
reasons  however  cogent  or  strong,  which  he  can  assign  as  urffin^  him  to 
the  accomplishment  of  his  purpose,  no  reasons,  can  sanctify  an  unconstitu- 
tional and  illegal  act. 

The  first  question,  sir,  which  I  intimated  it  to  be  my  purpose  to  examine, 
was,  by  whose  direction  was  this  change  of  the  deposits  made-? 

Now,  sir,  is  there  any  man  who  hears  me,  who  requires  proof  on  this 
point?  Is  there  an  intelligent  man  in  the  whole  country  who  does  not 
know  who  it  was  that  decided  on  the  removal  of  the  deposits  ?  Is  it  not 
of  universal  notoriety  ?  Does  any  man  doubt  that  it  was  the  act  of  the 
president  ?  That  it  was  done  by  his  authority  and  at  his  commaud  ?  The 
president,  on  this  subject,  has  himself  furnished  evidence  which  is  perfectly 
conclusive,  in  the  paper  which  he  has  read  to  his  cabinet ;  for,  although  he 
has  denied  to  the  Senate  an  official  copy  of  that  paper,  it  is  universally 
admitted  that  he  has  given  it  to  the  world,  as  containing  the  reasons  which 
influenced  him  to  this  act.  As  a  part  of  the  people,  if  not  in  our  senato- 
rial character,  we  have  a  right  to  avail  ourselves  of  that  paper,  and  of  all 
which  it  contains.  Is  it  not  perfectly  conclusive  as  to  the  authority  by 
which  the  deposits  have  been  removed?  I  admit  that  it  is  an  unprece- 
dented and  most  extraordinary  power.  The  Constitution  of  the  United 
States  admits  of  a  call,  from  the  chief  magistrate,  on  the  heads  of  depart- 
ments, for  their  opinions  in  writing. 

It  appears,  indeed,  that  this  power  which  the  Constitution  confers  on  the 
president,  had  been  exercised,  and  that  the  cabinet  were  divided,  two  and 
two  ;  and  one,  who  was  ready  to  go  on  either  side,  being  a  little  indifferent 
how  this  great  constitutional  power  was  settled  by  the  president.  The 
president  was  not  satisfied  with  calling  on  his  cabinet  for  their  opinions, 
in  the  customary  and  constitutional  form ;  but  he  prepares  a  paper  of  his 
own,  and  instead  of  receiving  reasons  from  them,  reads  to  them,  and  thus 


ON   THE    REMOVAL   OF   THE   DEPOSITS.  581 

indoctrinates  them  according  to  his  own  views.  This,  sir,  is  the  first  time 
in  the  history  of  our  country,  when  a  paper  has  been  thus  read,  and  thus 
published.  The  proceeding  is  entirely  without  precedent.  Those  who 
now  exercise  power,  consider  all  precedents  wrong.  They  hold  precedents 
in  contempt ;  and  casting  them  aside,  have  commenced  a  new  era  in 
administration.  But  while  they  thus  hold  all  precedents  in  contempt,  disre- 
garding all,  no  matter  how  long  established,  no  matter  to  what  departments 
of  the  government  they  may  have  given  sanction,  they  are  always  disposed 
to  shield  themselves  behind  a  precedent,  whenever  they  can  find  one  to 
subserve  their  purpose. 

But  the  question  is,  Who  gave  the  order  for  the  removal  of  the  deposits  ? 
By  whose  act  were  they  removed  from  the  bank  of  the  United  States, 
where  they  were  required  by  the  law  to  be  placed,  and  placed  in  banks 
which  the  law  never  designated  ?  I  tell  the  gentlemen  who  are  opposed  to 
me,  that  I  am  not  to  be  answered  by  the  exhibition  of  an  order  signed  by 
R.  Taney,  or  any  one  else.  I  want  to  know,  not  the  clerk  who  makes  the 
writing,  but  the  individual  who  dictates — not  the  hangman  who  executes 
the  culprit,  but  tho  tribunal  which  orders  the  execution.  I  want  the  orig- 
inal authority,  that  I  may  know  by  whose  order,  on  whose  authority,  the 
public  deposits  were  removed,  and  I  again  ask,  is  there  a  member  of  this 
Senate,  is  there  an  intelligent  man  in  the  whole  country,  who  doubts  on 
this  point  ?  Hear  what  the  president  himself  says,  in  his  manifesto  read  to 
his  cabinet : 

"  The  president  deems  it  his  duty,  to  communicate  in  this  manner  to  his  cab- 
inet the  final  conclusion  of  his  own  mind,  and  the  reasons  on  which  they  are 
founded,"  and  so  forth. 

At  the  conclusion  of  this  paper  what  does  he  say  ? 

"  The  president  again  repeats,  that  he  begs  his  cabinet  to  consider  the  pro- 
posed measure  as  his  own,  in  the  support  of  which  he  shall  require  no  one  of 
them  to  make  a  sacrifice  of  opinion  or  principle.  Its  responsibility  has  been  as- 
sumed, after  the  most  mature  reflection,  as  necessary  to  preserve  the  morals  ot 
the  people,  the  freedom  of  the  press,  and  the  purity  of  the  elective  franchise, 
without  which  all  will  unite  in  saying,  that  the  blood  and  treasure  expended  by 
our  forefathers  in  the  establishment  of  our  happy  system  of  government  will 
have  been  vain  and  fruitless.  Under  these  convictions  he  feels  that  a  measure 
so  important  to  the  American  people  can  not  be  commenced  too  soon ;  and  he 
therefore  names  the  1st  day  of  October  next  as  a  period  proper  for  the  change 
of  the  deposits,  or  sooner,  provided  the  necessary  arrangements  with  the  State 
banks  can  be  made." 

Sir,  is  there  a  senator  here  who  will  tell  me  that  this  removal  was  not 
made  by  the  president?  I  know,  indeed,  that  there  are  in  this  document 
many  of  those  most  mild,  most  gracious,  most  condescending  expressions, 
with  which  power  too  well  knows  how  to  clothe  its  mandates.     The  presi- 


582  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY   CLAY. 

dent  coaxes,  he  soothes  the  secretary,  in  the  most  bland  and  conciliating 
lanrruao-e  : 

"  In  the  remarks  he  has  made  on  this  all-important  question,  he  trusts  the 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury  will  see  only  the  frank  and  respectful  declarations  of 
the  opinions  which  the  president  has  formed  on  a  measure  of  great  national 
interest,  deeply  affecting  the  character  and  usefulness  of  his  administration ;  and 
not  a  spirit  of  dictation,  which  the  president  would  be  as  careful  to  avoid,  as 
to  resist.  Happy  will  he  be,  if  the  facts  now  disclosed  produce  uniformity  of 
opinion  and  unity  of  action  among  the  members  of  the  administration." 

Sir,  how  kind  !  how  gentle  !  How  very  gracious  must  this  have  sounded 
in  the  gratified  ear  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  !  Sir,  it  reminds  me 
of  an  historical  anecdote,  related  of  one  of  the  most  remarkable  char- 
acters which  our  species  has  ever  produced.  While  Oliver  Cromwell  was 
contending  for  the  mastery  of  Great  Britain  or  Ireland  (I  do  not  now 
remember  which),  he  besieged  a  certain  Catholic  town.  The  place  made  a 
stout  resistance  ;  but  at  length  the  town  being  likely  to  be  taken,  the  poor 
Catholics  proposed  terms  of  capitulation,  stipulating  therein  for  the  tolera- 
tion of  their  religion.  The  paper  containing  the  terms  was  brought  to 
Oliver,  who,  putting  on  his  spectacles  to  read  it,  cried  out,  "  Oh,  granted, 
granted,  certainly  ;"  he  added,  however,  "  but  if  one  of  them  shall  dare  to 
be  found  attending  mass,  he  shall  be  hanged  ;"  (under  what  section  is  not 
mentioned ;  whether  under  a  second,  or  any  other  section,  of  any  particu- 
lar law,  we  are  not  told). 

Thus,  sir,  the  secretary  was  told  by  the  president,  that  he  had  not  the 
slightest  wish  to  dictate — Oh,  no  ;  nothing  is  further  from  the  president's 
intention  ;  but,  sir,  what  was  he  told  in  the  sequel  ?  "  If  you  do  not  com- 
ply with  my  wishes — if  you  do  not  effect  the  removal  of  these  deposits 
within  the  period  I  assign  you — you  must  quit  your  office."  And  what, 
sir,  was  the  effect  ?  This  document  bears  date  on  the  18th  of  September. 
In  the  official  paper,  published  at  the  seat  of  government,  and  through 
which  it  is  understood  that  the  government  makes  known  its  wishes  and 
purposes  to  the  people  of  the  United  States,  we  were  told,  under  date  of 
the  20th  of  September,  1833,  two  days  only  after  this  cabinet  paper  was 
read,  as  follows : 

"  We  are  authorized  to  state" — [authorized ;  this  is  the  word  which  gave 
credit  to  this  annunciation — ]  "  We  are  authorized  to  state,  that  the  deposits  of 
the  public  money  will  be  changed  from  the  bank  of  the  United  States  to  the 
State  banks,  as  soon  as  necessary  arrangements  can  be  made  for  that  purpose ; 
and  that  it  is  believed  they  can  be  completed  in  Baltimore,  Philadelphia,  New 
York,  and  Boston,  in  time  to  make  the  change  by  the  1st  of  October,  and  per- 
haps sooner,  if  circumstances  should  render  an  earlier  action  necessary  on  the 
part  of  the  government." 

Yes,  sir,  on  the  18th  of  September  this  measure  was  decided  on  ;  and 
on  the  20th,  it  is  announced  to  the  people,  that  the  deposits  would  be  re- 


ON    THE    REMOVAL    OF    THE   DEPOSITS.  583 

moved  by  the  1st  of  October,  or  sooner,  if  practicable  !  Mr.  Duane  was 
continued  in  office  till  the  23d,  on  which  day  he  was  dismissed ;  and  be- 
tween the  23d  and  the  26th,  on  which  latter  day  the  mere  clerical  act  of 
signing  the  order  for  removal  was  performed,  Mr.  Taney,  by  whom  it  was 
done,  was  appointed  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  having  conformed  to  the  will 
of  the  president,  against  his  own  duty,  which  Mr.  Duane  would  not  do. 
Yes,  sir,  on  the  20th  went  forth  this  proclamation,  by  authority,  of  the 
removal  of  the  deposits,  although  Mr.  Duane  remained  in  office  till  the 
23d.  On  this  point  we  have  conclusive  proof  in  a  letter  of  the  president 
to  that  gentleman,  dated  on  the  23d,  which  letter,  after  all  the  gracious, 
friendly,  and  conciliating  language  of  the  cabinet  paper,  concludes  in  these 
terms  : 

"  I  feel  constrained  to  notify  you,  that  your  further  services  as  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury  are  no  longer  required.'' 

Such,  Mr.  President,  is  the  testimony  on  the  one  side  to  prove  the  truth 
of  the  proposition,  that  the  removal  of  the  deposits  from  the  bank  of  the 
United  States,  was  a  measure  determined  on  by  the  president  himself- — 
determined  on  while  the  latter  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  was  still  in  office, 
and  against  the  will  of  the  secretary ;  although  Mr.  Taney  may  have  put 
his  signature  to  the  order  on  the  26th — a  mere  ministerial  act,  done  in 
conformity  with  the  previous  decision  of  the  president,  that  the  removal 
should  take  place  on  or  before  the  1st  of  October. 

I  now  call  the  attention  of  the  Senate  to  testimony  of  the  other  party ; 
I  mean  Mr.  Duane.  After  giving  a  history  of  the  circumstances  which 
accompanied  his  appointment  to  office,  and  what  passed  antecedently  to  his 
removal,  he  proceeds  to  say  : 

"  Thus  was  I  thrust  into  office ;  thus  was  I  thrust  from  office ;  not  because  I 
had  neglected  any  duty ;  not  because  I  had  differed  with  him  about  the  bank 
of  the  United  States ;  but  because  I  refused,  without  further  inquiry  by  Con- 
gress, to  remove  the  deposits." 

Can  testimony  be  more  complete  to  establish  the  proposition  T  have  ad- 
vanced ?  And  is  it  possible,  after  the  testimony  of  the  president  on  one 
side,  and  of  his  secretary  on  the  other,  that  the  former  had  decided  that 
the  deposits  should  be  removed,  and  had  removed  the  secretary  because  he 
would  not  do  it,  that  any  man  can  doubt  that  the  removal  was  the  presi- 
dent's own  act  ? — that  it  was  done  in  accordance  with  his  command  ? 

And  now,  sir,  having  seen  that  the  removal  was  made  by  the  command 
and  authority  of  the  president,  I  shall  proceed  to  inquire  whether  it  was 
done  in  conformity  with  the  Constitution  and  laws  of  the  United  States. 

I  do  not  purpose  at  this  time  to  go  into  the  reasons  alleged  by  the 
president  or  his  secretary,  except  so  far  as  those  reasons  contain  an  attempt 
to  show  that  he  possessed  the  requisite  authority.  Because  if  the  presi- 
dent of  the  United  States  had  no  power  to  do  this  thing — if  the  Constitu- 


584  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY   CLAY. 

tion  and  laws,  instead  of  authorizing  it,  required  him  to  keep  his  hands  off 
the  treasury — it  is  useless  to  inquire  into  any  reasons  he  may  give  for 
exercising  a  power  which  he  did  not  possess.  Sir,  what  power  has  the 
President  of  the  United  States  over  the  treasury  ?  Is  it  in  the  charter 
establishing  the  bank  ?  The  clause  of  the  charter  relating  to  the  pub- 
lic deposits  declares, 

'•'  That  the  deposits  of  the  money  of  the  United  States,  in  places  in  which  the 
said  bank  and  branches  thereof  may  be  established,  shall  be  made  in  said  bank 
or  branches  thereof,  unless  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  shall  at  any  time 
otherwise  order  and  direct ;  in  which  case  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  shall 
immediately  lay  before  Congress,  if  in  session,  and  if  not,  immediately  after  the 
commencement  of  the  next  session,  the  reasons  of  such  order  or  direction." 

This  is  in  strict  consonance  with  the  act  creating  the  treasury  depart- 
ment in  1789.  The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  is  by  that  act  constituted  the 
agent  of  Congress  ;  he  is  required  to  report  to  Congress,  annually,  the  state 
of  the  finances,  and  his  plans  respecting  them  ;  and  if  Congress,  in  either 
of  its  branches,  shall  require  it,  he  is  to  report  at  any  time  on  any  par- 
ticular branch  of  the  fiscal  concerns  of  the  country.  He  is  the  agent  of 
Congress  to  watch  over  the  safety  of  the  national  deposits ;  and  if,  from 
any  peculiar  circumstances,  the  removal  of  them  shall  be  required,  he  is  to 
report  the  fact — to  whom  ?  to  the  president  ?  No,  sir  ;  he  must  report  to 
Cono-ress,  together  with  his  reasons  therefor.  By  the  charter  of  the  bank, 
the  President  of  the  United  States  is  clothed  with  two  powers  respecting  it, 
and  two  only.  By  one  of  its  clauses  he  is  authorized  to  nominate,  and 
by  and  with  the  consent  of  the  Senate,  to  appoint  the  government  direc- 
tors, and  to  remove  them  ;  by  the  other  clause  he  is  empowered  to  issue  a 
scire  facias  when  he  shall  apprehend  that  the  charter  of  the  institution  has 
been  violated.  These,  I  say,  are  the  only  powers  given  him  by  the  char- 
ter ;  all  others  are  denied  to  him,  and  are  given  to  others.  The  bank  is 
not  bound  to  report  the  state  of  its  affairs  to  him,  but  to  the  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury ;  and  it  is  thus  to  report  whenever  he  shall  call  upon  it  for  in- 
formation ;  but  when  it  becomes  necessary  to  go  further,  a  committee  of 
Congress  is  authorized  to  examine  the  books  of  the  bank,  and  to  look  into 
the  whole  state  of  its  affairs,  and  to  report,  not  to  the  president,  but  to 
Congress,  who  appointed  them.  The  president,  as  I  have  said,  is  restricted 
to  the  two  powers  of  appointing  directors,  and  issuing  a  scire  facias. 

And  has  the  president  any  power  over  the  treasury  by  the  Constitution  ? 
None,  sir — none.  The  Constitution  requires  that  no  money  shall  be  drawn 
from  the  treasury  except  by  appropriation,  thus  placing  it  entirely  under 
the  control  of  Congress.  But  the  president  himself  says — "  upon  him  has 
been  devolved,  by  the  Constitution  and  the  suffrages  of  the  American  peo- 
ple, the  duty  of  superintending  the  operation  of  the  executive  departments 
of  the  government,  and  seeing  that  the  laws  are  faithfully  executed."  Sir, 
the  president,  in  another  part  of  this  same  paper,  refers  to  the  same  s-uf 


ON    THE    REMOVAL    OF    THE    DEPOSITS.  585 

frages  of  the  American  people,  as  the  source  of  some  new  powers  over  and 
above  those  in  the  Constitution,  or  at  least  as  expressive  of  their  approba- 
tion of  the  exercise  of  them.  Sir,  I  differ  from  the  president  on  this  point ; 
and  though  it  does  not  belong  exactly  in  this  place  in  the  argument,  I  will 
add  a  remark  or  two  on  this  idea.  His  re-election  resulted  from  his  pre- 
sumed merits  generally,  and  the  confidence  and  attachment  of  the  people; 
and  from  the  unworthiness  of  his  competitor ;  nor  was  it  intended  thereby 
to  express  their  approbation  of  all  the  opinions  he  was  known  to  hold. 
Sir,  it  can  not  be  believed  that  the  great  State  of  Pennsylvania,  for  instance, 
which  has  so  justly  been  denominated  the  key-stone  of  our  federal  arch,  in 
voting  again  and  again  for  the  present  chief  magistrate,  meant  by  that  act 
to  reverse  her  own  opinions  on  the  subject  of  domestic  industry.  Sir,  the 
truth  is,  that  the  re-election  of  the  president  proves  as  little  an  approbation 
by  the  people  of  all  the  opinions  he  may  hold,  even  if  he  had  ever  un- 
equivocally expressed  what  those  opinions  were  (a  thing  which  he  never,  so 
far  as  my  knowledge  extends,  has  yet  done),  as  it  would  prove  that  if  the 
president  had  a  carbuncle  or  the  king's  evil,  they  meant,  by  re-electing  him, 
to  approve  of  his  carbuncle. 

But  the  president  says,  that  the  duty  "has  been  devolved  upon  him,"  to 
remove  the  deposits,  "  by  the  Constitution  and  the  suffrages  of  the  Amer- 
ican people."  Sir,  does  he  mean  to  say  that  these  suffrages  created  of 
themselves  a  new  source  of  power  ?  That  he  derived  an  authority  from 
them  which  he  did  not  hold  as  from  any  other  source  ?  If  he  means  that 
their  suffrages  made  him  the  president  of  the  United  Sthtes,  and  that,  as 
president,  he  may  exercise  every  power  pertaining  to  that  office  under  the 
Constitution  and  the  laws,  there  are  none  who  can  controvert  it ;  but  then 
there  could  be  no  need  to  add  the  suffrages  to  the  Constitution.  But  his 
language  is,  "  the  suffrages  of  the  American  people  and  the  Constitution." 
Sir,  I  deny  it.  There  is  not  a  syllable  in  the  Constitution  which  imposes 
any  such  duty  upon  him.  There  is  nothing  of  any  such  thing  ;  no  color 
to  the  idea.  It  is  true,  that  by  law,  all  the  departments,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  treasury,  are  placed  under  the  general  care  of  the  president. 
He  says  this  is  done  by  the  Constitution.  The  laws,  however,  have  ap- 
pointed but  three  executive  departments ;  and  it  is  true,  that  the  secre- 
taries are  often  required  by  law  to  act  in  certain  cases  according  to  the 
directions  of  the  president.  So  far  it  is  admitted  that  they  have  been,  by 
the  law  (not  by  the  Constitution),  placed  under  the  direction  of  the  pres- 
ident. Yet,  even  as  to  the  State  Department,  there  are  duties  devolving 
upon  the  secretary  over  which  the  president  has  no  control ;  and  for  the 
non-performance  of  which  that  officer  is  responsible,  not  to  the  president, 
but  to  the  legislative  tribunals,  or  to  the  courts  of  justice.  This  is  no 
new  opinion.  The  Supreme  Court,  in  the  case  of  Marbury  and  Madison, 
expressed  it  in  the  following  terms : 

"  By  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  the  president  is  invested  with 
certain  important  political  powers,  in  the  exercise  of  which,  he  is  to  use  his  own 


586  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

discretion,  and  is  accountable  only  to  his  country  in  his  political  character,  and  to 
his  own  conscience.  To  aid  him  in  the  performance  of  these  duties,  he  is 
authorized  to  appoint  certain  officers,  who  act  by  his  authority,  and  in  conform- 
ity to  his  orders. 

"  In  such  cases,  their  acts  are  his  acts ;  and  whatever  opinion  may  be  enter- 
tained of  the  manner  in  which  executive  discretion  may  be  used,  still  there 
exists,  and  can  exist,  no  power  to  control  that  discretion.  The  subjects  are 
political.  They  respect  the  nation,  not  individual  rights,  and  being  intrusted  to 
the  executive,  the  decision  of  the  executive  is  conclusive.  The  application  of 
this  remark  will  be  perceived  by  adverting  to  the  act  of  Congress  for  establish- 
ing the  department  of  foreign  affairs.  This  officer,  as  his  duties  were  prescribed 
by  that  act,  is  to  conform  precisely  to  the  will  of  the  president.  He  is  the  mere 
organ  by  whom  that  will  is  communicated.  The  acts  of  such  an  officer,  as  an 
officer,  can  never  be  examined  by  the  courts. 

"  But  when  the  Legislature  proceeds  to  impose  on  that  officer  other  duties ; 
when  he  is  directed  peremptorily  to  perform  certain  acts  (that  is,  when  he  is  not 
placed  under  the  direction  of  the  president),  when  the  rights  of  individuals  are 
dependent  on  the  performance  of  those  acts,  he  is  so  far  the  officer  of  the  law ; 
is  amenable  to  the  laws  for  his  conduct ;  and  can  not  at  his  discretion  sport 
away  the  vested  rights  of  others. 

"  The  conclusion  from  this  reasoning  is,  that  where  the  heads  of  departments 
are  the  political  or  confidential  agents  of  the  executive,  merely  to  execute  the 
will  of  the  president,  or  rather  to  act  in  cases  in  which  the  executive  possesses 
a  constitutional  or  legal  discretion,  nothing  can  be  more  perfectly  clear  than  that 
their  acts  are  only  politically  examinable.  But  where  a  specific  duty  is  assigned 
by  law,  and  individual  rights  depend  upon  the  performance  of  that  duty,  it 
seems  equally  clear  that  the  individual  who  considers  himself  injured  has  a  right 
to  resort  to  the  laws  of  his  country  for  a  remedy." 

Though  the  president  is  mistaken  in  his  assertion,  that  the  Constitution 
devolves  upon  the  president  the  superintendence  of  the  departments,  there 
is  one  clause  of  that  instrument  which  he  has  very  correctly  quoted,  and 
which  makes  it  his  duty  to  "see  that  the  laws  are  faithfully  executed,"  as 
it  is  mine  now  to  examine  what  authority  he  obtains  by  this  clause  in  the 
case  before  us.  Under  it,  the  most  enormous  pretensions  have  been  set  up 
for  the  president. 

It  has  been  contended,  that  if  a  law  shall  pass  which  the  president  does 
not  conceive  to  be  in  conformity  with  the  Constitution,  he  is  not  bound  to 
execute  it ;  and  if  a  treaty  shall  have  been  made,  which,  in  his  opinion, 
has  been  unconstitutional  in  its  stipulations,  he  is  not  bound  to  enforce 
them.  And  it  necessarily  follows,  that,  if  the  courts  of  justice  shall  give 
a  decision,  which  he  shall  in  like  manner  deem  repugnant  to  the  Consti- 
tution, he  is  not  expected  or  bound  to  execute  that  law.  Sir,  let  us 
look  a  little  into  this  principle,  and  trace  it  out  into  some  of  its  conse- 
quences. 

One  of  the  most  important  acts  performed  at  the  department  is,  to  settle 
those  very  large  accounts  which  individuals  have  with  the  government ; 


ON    THE    REMOVAL    OF    THE    DEPOSITS.  587 

accounts  amounting  to  millions  of  dollars  ;  to  settle  them,  an  auditor  and 
a  comptroller  have  been  appointed  by  law,  whose  official  acts  may  aft'ect, 
to  the  extent  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  dollars,  the  property  of  indi- 
vidual contractors.  If  the  pretensions  of  the  president  are  well  founded,  his 
power  goes  further  than  he  has  exerted  it.  He  may  go  into  the  office  of 
the  auditor,  or  the  office  of  the  comptroller,  and  may  say  to  him,  Sir,  Mr. 
A.  B.  has  an  account  under  settlement  in  this  office,  one  item  of  which, 
objected  to  by  you,  T  consider  to  be  in  accordance  with  the  Constitution  ; 
pass  that  account  and  send  it  to  the  auditor ;  and  he  may  then  go  to  the 
auditor  and  hold  similar  lansTiasre.  If  the  clause  of  the  Constitution  is  to 
be  expounded  as  is  contended  for,  it  amounts  to  a  complete  absorption  of 
all  the  powers  of  government  in  the  person  of  the  executive.  Sir,  when  a 
doctrine  like  this  shall  be  admitted  as  orthodox,  when  it  shall  be  acquiesced 
in  by  the  people  of  this  country,  our  government  will  have  become  a  simple 
machine  enough.  The  will  of  the  president  will  be  the  whole  of  it. 
There  will  be  hut  one  bed,  and  that  will  be  the  bed  of  Procrustes ;  but 
one  will,  the  will  of  the  president.  All  the  departments,  and  all  subordi- 
nate functionaries  of  government,  great  or  small,  must  submit  to  that  will  ; 
and  if  they  do  not,  then  the  president  will  have  failed  to  "  see  that  the 
laws  are  faithfully  executed." 

Sir,  such  an  extravagant  and  enormous  pretension  as  this  must  be  set 
alongside  of  its  exploded  compeer,  the  pretension  that  Congress  has  the 
power  of  passing  any  and  all  laws  which  it  may  suppose  conducive  to  "  the 
general  welfare." 

Let  me,  in  a  few  words,  present  to  the  Senate  what  are  my  own  views 
as  to  the  structure  of  this  government.  I  hold  that  no  powers  can  legiti- 
mately be  exercised  under  it  but  such  as  are  expressly  delegated,  and  those 
which  are  necessary  to  carry  these  into  effect.  Sir,  the  executive  power, 
as  existing  in  this  government,  is  not  to  be  traced  to  the  notions  of  Montes- 
quieu, or  of  any  other  writer  of  that  class,  in  the  abstract  nature  of  the 
executive  power.  Neither  is  the  legislative  nor  the  judicial  power  to  be 
decided  by  any  such  reformer.  These  several  powers  with  us,  whatever 
they  may  be  elsewhere,  are  just  what  the  Constitution  has  made  them,  and 
nothing  more.  And  as  to  the  general  clauses  in  which  reference  is  made 
to  either,  they  are  to  be  controlled  and  interpreted  by  those  where  these 
several  powers  are  specially  delegated,  otherwise  the  executive  will  become 
a  great  vortex  that  must  end  in  swallowing  up  all  the  rest.  Nor  will  the 
judicial  power  be  any  longer  restrained  by  the  restraining  clauses  in  the 
Constitution,  which  relate  to  its  exercise. 

What  then,  it  will  be  asked,  does  this  clause,  that  the  president  shall  see 
that  the  laws  are  faithfully  executed,  mean  ?  Sir,  it  means  nothing  more 
nor  less  than  this,  that  if  resistance  is  made  to  the  laws,  he  shall  take  care 
that  resistance  shall  cease.  Congress,  by  the  first  article  of  the  eighth  section 
of  the  Constitution,  is  required  to  provide  for  calling  out  the  militia  to  ex- 
ecute the  laws  in  case  of  resistance.     Sir,  it  might  as  well  be  contended 


5S8  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

under  that  clause,  that  Congress  have  the  power  of  determining  what  are, 
and  what  are  not,  the  laws  of  the  land.  Congress  has  the  power  of  calling 
out  the  military  ;  well,  sir,  what  is  the  president,  by  the  Constitution  ?  He 
is  commander  of  the  army  and  navy  of  the  United  States,  and  of  the 
militia  when  called  out  into  actual  service.  "When,  then,  we  are  here  told 
that  he  is  clothed  with  the  whole  physical  power  of  the  nation,  and  when 
we  are  afterward  told  that  he  must  take  care  that  the  laws  are  faithfully 
executed,  is  it  possible  that  any  man  can  be  so  lost  to  the  love  of  liberty, 
as  not  to  admit  that  this  goes  no  further  than  to  remove  any  resistance 
which  may  be  made  to  the  execution  of  the  laws  ?  We  have  established  a 
system  in  which  power  has  been  carefully  divided  among  different  depart- 
ments of  the  government.  And  we  have  been  told  a  thousand  times  that 
this  division  is  indispensable  as  a  safeguard  to  civil  liberty.  We  have 
designated  the  departments,  and  have  established  in  each  officers  to  exam- 
ine the  powers  belonging  to  each.  The  president,  it  is  true,  presides  over 
the  whole ;  his  eye  surveys  the  whole  extent  of  the  system  in  all  its  move- 
ments. But  has  he  power  to  enter  into  the  courts,  for  example,  and  tell 
them  what  is  to  be  done  ?  Or  may  he  come  here,  and  tell  us  the  same  ? 
Or  when  we  have  made  a  law,  can  he  withhold  the  power  necessary  to  its 
practical  effect?  He  moves,  it  is  true,  in  a  high,  a  glorious  sphere.  It  is 
his  to  watch  over  the  whole  with  a  paternal  eye  ;  and,  when  any  one  wheel 
of  the  vast  machine  is  for  a  time  interrupted  by  the  occurrence  of  invasion 
or  rebellion,  it  is  his  care  to  propel  its  movements,  and  to  furnish  it  with 
the  requisite  means  of  performing  its  appropriate  duty  in  its  own  place. 

That  this  is  the  true  interpretation  of  the  constitutional  clause  to  which 
I  have  alluded,  is  inferred  from  the  total  silence  of  all  cotemporaneous 
expositors  of  that  instrument  on  the  subject.  I  have  myself  (and  when  it 
was  not  in  my  power  personally,  have  caused  others  to  aid  me),  made 
researches  into  the  numbers  of  the  Federalist,  the  debates  in  the  Virginia 
convention,  and  in  the  conventions  of  other  States,  as  -well  as  all  other 
sources  of  information  to  which  I  could  obtain  access,  and  I  have  not,  in  a 
solitary  instance,  found  the  slightest  color  for  the  claims  set  up  in  these 
most  extraordinary  times,  for  the  president,  that  he  has  authority  to  afford 
or  withhold  at  pleasure  the  means  of  enforcing  the  laws,  and  to  superintend 
and  control  an  officer  charged  with  a  specific  duty,  made  by  the  law  ex- 
clusively his.  But,  sir,  I  have  found  some  authorities  which  strongly 
militate  against  any  such  claim.  If  the  doctrine  be  indeed  true,  then  it  is 
most  evident  that  there  is  no  longer  any  other  control  over  our  affairs  than 
that  exerted  by  the  president.  If  it  be  true,  that  when  a  duty  is  by  law 
specifically  assigned  to  a  particular  officer,  the  president  may  go  into  his 
office  and  control  him  in  the  manner  of  performing  it,  then  is  it  most 
manifest  that  all  barriers  for  the  safety  of  the  treasury  are  gone.  Sir,  it  is 
that  union  of  the  purse  and  the  sword,  in  the  hand  of  one  man,  which 
constitutes  the  best  definition  of  tyranny  which  our  language  can  give. 

The  charter  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States  requires  that  the  public 


ON    THE    REMOVAL    OF    THE    DEPOSITS.  589 

deposits  be  made  in  its  vaults.  It  also  gives  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 
power  to  remove  them — and  why  ?  The  secretary  is  at  the  head  of  the 
finances  of  the  government.  Weekly  reports  are  made  by  the  bank  to 
bim.  He  is  to  report  to  Congress  annually  ;  and  to  either  House  wh<  n- 
ever  he  should  be  called  upon.  He  is  the  sentinel  of  Congre-s — the  agent 
of  Congress — the  representative  of  Congress.  Congress  has  prescribed 
and  has  defined  his  duties.  He  is  required  to  report  to  them,  not  to  the 
president.  He  is  put  there  by  us,  as  our  representative  ;  he  is  required  to 
remove  the  deposits  when  they  shall  be  in  danger,  and  we  not  in  session ; 
but  when  he  does  this,  he  is  required  to  report  to  Congress  the  fact,  with 
his  reasons  for  it.  Now,  sir,  if,  when  an  officer  of  government  is  thus 
specifically  assigned  his  duty,  if  he  is  to  report  his  official  acts  on  his 
responsibility  to  Congress ;  if,  in  a  case  where  no  power  whatever  is  given 
to  the  president,  the  president  may  go  and  say  to  that  officer,  "  Go  and  do 
as  I  bid  you,  or  you  shall  be  removed  from  office ;"  let  me  ask,  whether 
the  danger  apprehended  by  that  eloquent  man  has  not  already  been 
realized  ? 

But,  sir,  let  me  suppose  that  I  am  mistaken  in  my  construction  of  the 
Constitution ;  and  let  me  suppose  that  the  president  has,  as  is  contended, 
power  to  see  every  particular  law  carried  into  effect ;  what,  then,  was  it  his 
duty  to  do  in  the  present  case  under  the  clause  thus  interpreted  \  The  law 
authorized  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  to  remove  the  deposits  on  his 
responsibility  to  Congress.  Now,  if  the  president  has  power  to  see  this, 
like  other  laws,  faithfully  executed,  then,  surely,  the  law  exacted  of  him 
that  he  should  see  that  the  secretary  was  allowed  to  exercise  his  free,  un- 
biased, uncontrolled  judgment  in  removing  or  not  removing  them.  That 
was  the  execution  of  the  law.  Congress  had  not  said  that  the  Secretary 
of  War,  or  the  Secretary  of  State,  might  remove  the  public  deposits  from 
the  treasury. 

The  president  has  no  right  to  go  to  the  Secretary  of  War  and  ask  him 
what  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  ought  to  do.  He  might  as  well  have 
consulted  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  about  a  contemplated  movement 
of  the  army,  as  to  ask  the  Secretary  of  War  about  the  disposition  of  the 
public  moneys.  It  was  not  to  the  president,  and  all  his  secretaries  com- 
bined, that  the  power  was  given  to  alter  the  disposition  of  the  deposits  in 
the  bank.  It  was  to  the  secretary  alone,  exclusive  of  the  president,  and  all 
the  other  officers  of  government.  And  according  to  gentlemen's  own 
showing,  by  their  construction  of  the  clause,  the  secretrary  ought  to  have 
been  left  to  his  own  unbiased  determination,  uncontrolled  by  the  president, 
or  any  body  else. 

I  would  thank  the  Secretary  of  the  Senate  to  get  me  the  sedition  law. 
It  is  not  very  certain  how  soon  we  may  be  called  to  act  upon  it. 

Now,  sir,  let  us  trace  some  of  the  other  sources  of  the  exercise  of  this 
power,  or  motives  for  it,  or  by  whatever  name  they  are  to  be  called.  He 
says  to  Mr.  Duane  : 


590  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

"  The  president  repeats,  that  he  begs  the  cabinet  to  consider  the  proposed 
measure  as  his  own,  in  the  support  of  which  he  shall  require  no  one  of  them  to 
make  a  sacrifice  of  opinion  or  principle.  Its  responsibility  has  been  assumed, 
after  the  most  mature  deliberation  and  reflection,  as  necessary  to  preserve  the 
morals  of  the  people,  the  freedom  of  the  press,  and  the  purity  of  the  elective 
franchise." 

The  morals  of  the  people !  "What  part  of  the  Constitution  has  given 
to  the  president  any  power  over  "  the  morals  of  the  people  ?"  None.  It 
does  not  give  such  power  even  over  religion,  the  presiding  and  genial  in- 
fluence over  every  true  system  of  morals.  No,  sir,  it  gives  him  no  such 
power. 

And  what  is  the  next  step  ?  To-day  he  claims  a  power  as  necessary  to 
the  morals  of  the  people ;  to-morrow  he  will  claim  another,  as  still  more 
indispensable  to  our  religion.  And  the  president  might  in  this  case  as 
well  have  said  that  he  went  into  the  office  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury, 
and  controlled  his  free  exercise  of  his  authority  as  secretary,  because  it 
was  necessary  to  preserve  "  the  religion  of  the  people !"  I  ask  for  the 
authority.  Will  any  one  of  those  gentlemen  here,  who  consider  them- 
selves as  the  vindicators  of  the  executive,  point  me  to  any  clause  of  the 
Constitution  which  gives  to  the  present  President  of  the  United  States  any 
power  to  preserve  h  the  morals  of  the  people  ?" 

But  "  the  freedom  of  the  press,"  it  seems,  was  another  motive.  Sir,  I 
am  not  surprised  that  the  present  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  should  feel  a 
desire  to  revive  this  power  over  the  press.  He,  I  think,  was  a  member  of 
that  party  which  passed  the  sedition  law,  under  precisely  the  same  pretext. 
I  recollect  it  was  said,  that  this  bank,  this  monster  of  tyranny,  was  taking 
into  its  pay  a  countless  number  of  papers,  and  by  this  means  was  destroy- 
ing the  fair  fame  of  the  president  aud  his  secretary,  and  all  that  sort  of 
thing.  Sir,  it  is  sometimes  useful  to  refer  back  to  those  old  things— to  the 
notions  and  the  motives  which  induced  men  in  former  times  to  do  certain 
acts  which  may  not  be  altogether  unlike  some  others  in  our  own  time. 

The  famous  sedition  act  was  passed,  sir,  in  1789  ;  and  it  contained,  among 
others,  the  following  provision  : 

"  Section  2.  That  if  any  person  shall  write,  print,  utter,  or  publish,  or  shall 
cause  or  procure  to  be  written,  printed,  uttered,  or  published,  or  shall,  knowingly 
and  willingly,  assist  or  aid  in  Aviiting,  printing,  uttering,  or  publishing,  any  false, 
scandalous,  and  malicious  writing  or  writings,  against  the  government  of  the 
United  States,  or  either  House  of  the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  or  the 
President  of  the  United  States,  with  intent  to  defame  the  said  government,  or 
either  House  of  the  said  Congress,  or  the  said  president,  or  to  bring  them,  or 
either  of  them,  into  contempt  or  disrepute ;  or  to  excite  against  them,  or  either 
of  them,  the  hatred  of  the  good  people  of  the  United  States,  or  to  stir  up  se- 
dition within  the  United  States ;  or  to  excite  any  unlawful  combinations  therein, 
for  opposing  or  resisting  any  law  of  the  United  States,  or  any  act  of  the  Presi- 
dent of  the  United  States,  done  in  pursuance  of  any  such  law,  or  of  the  powers 


ON    THE    EEMOVAL    OF    THE    DEPOSITS.  591 

in  him  vested  by  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States ;  or  to  resist,  oppose,  or 
defeat,  any  such  law  or  act ;  or  to  aid,  encourage,  or  abet,  any  hostile  designs 
of  any  foreign  nation,  against  the  United  States,  their  people,  or  government, 
then  such  person,  being  thereof  convicted  before  any  court  of  the  United  States 
having  jurisdiction  thereof,  shall  be  punished  by  a  fine  not  exceeding  two  thou- 
sand dollars,  and  by  imprisonment  not  exceeding  two  years." 

We  have  now,  sir,  in  the  reasons  for  the  removal  of  the  government 
deposits,  the  same  motives  avowed  and  acted  upon.  The  abuse  of  the 
government,  bringing  into  disrepute,  using  contemptuous  language  to  per- 
sons high  in  authority,  constituted  the  motives  for  passing  the  sedition 
law  ;  and  what  have  we  now  but  a  repetition  of  the  same  complaints  of 
abuses,  disrespect,  and  so  forth.  As  it  is  now,  so  it  was  then ;  for,  says 
the  next  section  of  the  same  sedition  act : 

"  That  if  any  person  shall  be  prosecuted,  under  this  act,  for  the  writing  or 
publishing  of  any  libel  aforesaid,  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  defendant,  upon  the 
trial  of  the  cause,  to  give  in  evidence  in  his  defense,  the  truth  of  the  matter 
contained  in  the  publication  charged  as  a  libel.  And  the  jury  who  shall  try  the 
cause,  shall  have  a  right  to  determine  the  law  and  the  fact,  under  the  direc- 
tion of  the  court,  as  in  other  cases." 

It  is  only  for  the  sake  of  the  truth,  said  they  who  favored  the  passage 
of  that  law — for  the  sake  of  justice  ;  as  it  is  now  said  that  it  was  neces- 
sary to  remove  the  deposits,  in  order  to  preserve  the  purity  of  the  press. 
That 's  all,  sir.  But  there  is  one  part  of  this  assumption  of  power  by 
the  president  much  more  tyrannical  than  that  act.  Under  that  law,  the 
offending  party  was  to  have  a  trial  by  jury  ;  the  benefit  of  witnesses  and 
of  counsel :  and  the  right  to  have  the  truth  of  his  alleged  libels  examined. 
But  what  is  the  case  now  under  consideration '?  Why,  sir,  the  president 
takes  the  whole  matter  iu  his  own  hands ;  he  is  at  once  the  judge,  the 
jury,  and  the  executioner  of  the  sentence,  and  utterly  deprives  the  accused 
party  of  the  opportunity  of  showing  that  the  imputed  libel  is  no  libel  at 
all,  but  founded  in  the  clearest  truth. 

But  "  the  purity  of  the  elective  franchise,"  also,  the  president  has  very 
much  at  heart.  And  here,  again,  I  ask  what  part  of  the  Constitution  gives 
him  any  power  over  that  "  franchise  ?"  Look,  sir,  at  the  nature  of  the 
exercise  of  this  power !  If  it  was  really  necessary  that  steps  should  be 
taken  to  preserve  the  purity  of  the  press  or  the  freedom  of  elections,  what 
ought  the  president  to  have  done  ?  Taken  the  matter  into  his  own  hands  ? 
No,  sir ;  it  was  his  duty  to  recommend  to  Congress  the  passage  of  laws 
for  the  purpose,  under  suitable  sanctions ;  laws  which  the  courts  of  the 
United  States  would  execute.  We  could  not  have  been  worse  off  under 
such  laws,  (however  exceptionable  they  might  be),  than  we  are  now.  We 
could  then,  sir,  have  reviewed  the  laws,  and  seen  whether  Congress  or  the 
president  had  properly  any  power  over  this  matter ;  or  whether  the  article 
of  the  Constitution  which  forbids  that  the  press  shall  be  touched,  and  de- 


592  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

clares  that  religion  shall  be  sacred  from  all  the  powers  of  legislation, 
applied  in  the  case  or  not.  This  the  president  has  undertaken  to  do  of 
himself,  without  the  shadow  of  authority,  either  in  the  Constitution  or  the 
laws. 

Suppose,  sir,  that  this  contumacious  institution,  which  committed  the 
great  sin,  in  1829,  of  not  appointing  a  new  president  to  a  certain  one  of 
its  branches — suppose  that  the  bank  should  go  on  and  vindicate  itself 
against  the  calumnies  poured  out  upon  it — that  it  should  continue  to  stand 
upon  its  defense;  how  inefficient  will  have  been  the  exercise  of  power  by 
the  president !  How  inadequate  to  the  end  he  had  in  view,  of  preserving 
the  press  from  being  made  use  of  to  defend  the  bank !  Why,  sir,  if  we 
had  had  the  power,  and  the  president  had  come  to  us,  we  could  have  laid 
Mr.  Nicholas  Biddle  by  the  heels,  if  he  should  have  undertaken  to  publish 
another  report  of  General  Smith  or  Mr.  Duffie,  or  another  speech  of  the 
eloquent  gentleman  near  me  (Mr.  Webster),  or  any  other  such  libels, 
tending  to  bring  the  president  or  his  administration  into  disrepute.  But 
the  President  of  the  United  States,  who  thought  he  had  the  bank  in  his 
power,  who  thought  he  could  stop  it,  who  was  induced  to  believe,  by  that 
"influence  behiud  the  throne,  greater  than  itself,"  that  he  could  breakdown 
the  bank  at  a  word,  has  only  shown  this  want  of  power  over  the  press,  by 
his  attempt  to  exercise  it  in  the  manner  he  has  done.  The  bank  has 
avowed  and  openly  declared  its  purpose  to  defend  itself  on  all  suitable  oc- 
casions. And,  what  is  still  more  provoking,  instead  of  being  a  bankrupt, 
as  was  expected,  with  its  doors  closed,  and  its  vaults  inaccessible,  it  has 
now,  it  seems,  got  more  money  than  it  knows  what  to  do  with  ;  and  this 
greatest  of  misers  and  hoarders,  cruelly  refuses  to  let  out  a  dollar  of  its 
ten  millions  of  specie,  to  relieve  the  sufferings  of  the  banks  to  which  the 
government  deposits  have  been  transferred. 

Sir,  the  President  of  the  United  States  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  morals 
of  the  community.  No,  sir ;  for  the  preservation  of  our  morals  we  are  re- 
sponsible to  God,  and  I  trust  that  that  responsibility  will  ever  remain  to 
Him  and  His  mercy  alone.  Neither  had  the  president  any  thing  to  do 
with  the  freedom  of  the  press.  The  power  over  it  is  denied,  even  to  Con- 
gress, by  the  people.  It  was  said,  by  one  of  those  few  able  men  and  bright 
luminaries,  whom  Providence  has  yet  spared  to  us,  in  answer  to  complaints 
by  a  foreign  minister,  against  the  freedom  with  which  the  American  press 
treated  certain  French  functionaries,  that  the  press  was  one  of  those  con- 
cerns which  admitted  of  no  regulation  by  the  government ;  that  its  abuses 
must  be  tolerated,  lest  its  freedom  should  be  abridged.  Such,  sir,  is  the 
freedom  of  the  press,  as  recognized  by  our  Constitution,  and  so  it  has  been 
respected  ever  since  the  repeal  of  the  obnoxious  act  which  I  have  already 
quoted,  until  the  detestable  principles  of  that  law  have  been  reasserted  by 
the  president,  in  his  assumption  of  a  power,  in  nowise  belonging  to  his 
office,  of  preserving  the  purity  of  the  press. 

Such,  sir,  are  the  powers  on  which  the  president  relies  to  justify  his  seiz- 


ON    THE    KEMOVAL    OF   THE    DEPOSITS.  593 

ure  of  the  treasury  of  the  United  States.  I  have  examined  them  one  by 
one  ;  and  they  all  fail,  utterly  fail,  to  bear  out  the  act.  We  are  irresistibly 
brought  to  the  conclusion,  that  the  removal  of  the  public  money  from  the 
bank  of  the  United  States  has  been  effected  by  the  displacement  from  the 
head  of  the  treasury  department  of  one  who  would  not  remove  them,  and 
putting  in  his  stead  another  person,  who  would ;  and,  secondly,  that  the 
president  has  no  color  of  authority  in  the  Constitution  or  the  laws  for  the 
act  which  he  has  undertaken  to  perform. 

Let  us  now,  for  a  few  moments,  examine  the  consequences  which  may 
ensue  from  the  exercise  of  this  enormous  power.  If  the  president  has 
authority,  in  a  case  in  which  the  law  has  assigned  a  specific  duty  exclu- 
sively to  a  designated  officer,  to  control  the  exercise  of  discretion  by  that 
officer,  he  has  a  right  to  interfere  in  every  other  case,  and  remove  every 
one  from  office  who  hesitates  to  do  his  bidding,  against  his  judgment  of 
his  own  duty.  This,  surely,  is  a  logical  deduction  not  to  be  resisted. 
Well,  then,  how  stands  the  matter  ?  Recapitulating  the  provisions  of  the 
law  prescribing  how  money  should  be  drawn  from  the  treasury  and  the 
deduction  above  stated,  what  is  to  prevent  the  president  from  going  to  the 
comptroller,  and,  if  he  will  not  countersign  a  warrant  which  he  has  found 
an  accommodating  secretary  to  sign,  turning  him  out  for  another  ;  then 
going  to  the  register,  and  doing  the  same ;  and  then  to  the  treasurer  and 
commanding  him  to  pay  over  the  money  expressed  in  the  warrant,  or  sub- 
ject himself  to  expulsion. 

Where  is  the  security  against  such  conduct  on  the  part  of  the  president  \ 
Where  the  boundary  to  this  tremendous  authority,  which  he  has  under- 
taken to  exercise  ?  Sir,  every  barrier  around  the  treasury  is  broken  down. 
From  the  moment  that  the  president  said,  "  I  make  this  measure  my  own,  I 
take  upon  myself  the  responsibility,"  from  that  moment  the  public  treasury 
might  as  well  have  been  at  the  Hermitage  as  at  this  place.  Sir,  the  meas- 
ure adopted  by  the  president  is  without  precedent — in  our  day  at  least. 
There  is,  indeed,  a  precedent  on  record,  but  you  must  go  down  to  the 
Christian  era  for  it.  It  will  be  recollected,  by  those  who  are  conversant 
with  ancient  history,  that  after  Pompey  was  compelled  to  retire  to  Brun- 
dusium,  Caesar,  who  had  been  anxious  to  give  him  battle,  returned  to 
Rome,  "having  reduced  Italy  (says  the  historian),  in  sixty  days  (the  ex- 
act period,  sir,  between  the  removal  of  the  deposits,  and  the  meeting  of 
Congress,  without  the  usual  allowance  of  three  days'  grace),  without 
bloodshed."  The  historian  goes  on  :  "finding  the  city  in  a  more  settled 
condition  than  he  expected,  and  many  senators  there,  he  addresses  them  in 
a  mild  and  gracious  manner  (as  the  president  addressed  his  late  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury),  and  desired  them  to  send  deputies  to  Pompey  with  an 
offer  of  honorable  terms  of  peace.  As  Metellus,  the  tribune,  opposed  his  tak- 
ing money  out  of  the  public  treasury,  and  cited  some  laws  against  it  (such, 
sir,  I  suppose,  as  I  have  endeavored  to  cite  on  this  occasion),  Cassar  said, 
'  arms  and  laws  do  not  flourish  together.     If  you  are  not  pleased  with  what 

38 


594  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY    CLAY. 

I  am  about,  you  have  only  to  withdraw.  (Leave  the  office,  Mr.  Duane  !) 
War,  indeed,  will  not  tolerate  much  liberty  of  speech.  When  I  say  this,  I 
am  renouncing  my  own  right ;  for  you,  and  all  those  whom  I  have  found  ex- 
citing a  spirit  of  faction  against  me,  are  at  my  disposal.  Having  said 
this,  he  approached  the  doors  of  the  treasury,  and  as  the  keys  were 
not  produced,  he  sent  for  workmen  to  break  them  open.  Metellus  again 
opposed  him,  and  gained  credit  with  some  for  his  firmness ;  but  Caesar, 
with  an  elevated  voice,  threatened  to  put  him  to  death,  if  he  gave  any  fur- 
ther trouble.  '  And  you  know  very  well,  young  man,'  said  he,  '  that  this  is 
harder  for  me  to  say  than  to  do.'  Metellus,  terrified  by  the  measure,  re- 
tired, and  Csesar  was  afterward  easily  and  readily  supplied  with  every 
tiling  necessary  for  the  war." 

And  where  now,  sir,  is  the  public  treasury  ?  Who  can  tell  ?  It  is  cer- 
tainly without  a  local  habitation,  if  it  be  not  without  a  name.  And  where 
is  the  money  of  the  people  of  the  United  States  ?  Floating  about  in 
treasury  drafts  or  checks  to  the  amount  of  millions,  placed  in  the  hands  of 
tottering  banks,  to  enable  them  to  pay  their  own  debts,  instead  of  being 
appropriated  to  the  service  of  the  people.  These  checks  are  scattered  to 
the  winds  by  the  treasurer  of  the  United  States,  who  is  required  by  law  to 
let  out  money  from  the  treasury,  on  warrants  signed  by  the  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury,  countersigned,  registered,  and  so  forth,  and  not  otherwise. 

[Mr.  Clay  here  referred  to  a  correspondence,  which  he  quoted,  between  the 
treasurer  and  the  officers  of  the  bank,  complaining  of  these  checks  drawn  with- 
out proper  notice,  and  so  forth,  in  which  the  treasurer  says  they  were  only 
Issued  to  be  used  in  certain  contingences  and  so  forth.] 

Thus,  sir,  the  people's  money  is  put  into  a  bank  here,  and  a  bank  there, 
in  regard  to  the  solvency  of  which  we  know  nothing,  and  it  is  placed  there 
to  be  used  in  the  event  of  certain  contingences — contingences  of  which 
neither  the  treasurer  nor  the  secretary  have  yet  deigned  to  furnish  us  any 
account. 

Where  was  the  oath  of  office  of  the  treasurer,  when  he  ventured  thus 
to  sport  with  the  people's  money  ?  Where  wras  the  Constitution,  which 
forbids  money  to  be  drawn  from  the  treasury  without  appropriation  by 
law  ?  Where  was  the  treasurer's  bond,  when  he  thus  cast  about  people's 
money  ?  Sir,  his  bond  is  forfeited.  I  do  not  pretend  to  any  great  knowl- 
edge of  the  law,  but  give  me  an  intelligent  and  unpacked  jury,  and  I  will 
undertake  to  prove  to  him  that  he  has  forfeited  the  penalty  of  his  bond. 

Mr.  President,  the  people  of  the  United  States  are  indebted  to  the  pres 
ident  for  the  boldness  of  this  movement ;  and  as  one  among  the  humblest 
of  them,  I  profess  my  obligations  to  him.  lie  has  told  the  Senate,  in  his 
message  refusing  an  official  copy  of  his  cabinet  paper,  that  it  has  been 
published  for  the  information  of  the  people.  As  a  pail  of  the  people,  the 
Senate,  if  not  in  their  official  character,  have  a  right  to  its  use.  In  that 
extraordinary  paper,  he  has  proclaimed,  that  the  measure  is  his  own  ;  and 


ON   THE    REMOVAL   OF   THE   DEPOSITS.  595 

that  he  has  taken  upon  himself  the  responsibility  of  it.     In  plain  English, 
he  has  proclaimed  an  open,  palpable,  and  daring  usurpation  ! 

For  more  than  fifteen  years,  Mr.  President,  I  have  been  struggling  to 
avoid  the  present  state  of  things.  I  thought  I  perceived  in  some  proceed- 
ings, during  the  conduct  of  the  Seminole  war,  a  spirit  of  defiance  to  the 
Constitution  and  to  all  law.  With  what  sincerity  and  truth,  with  what 
earnestness  and  devotion  to  civil  liberty,  I  have  struggled,  the  searcher  of 
all  human  hearts  best  knows.  With  what  fortune,  the  bleeding  Constitu- 
tion of  my  country  now  fatally  attests. 

I  have,  nevertheless,  persevered ;  and  under  every  discouragement 
during  the  short  time  that  I  expect  to  remain  in  the  public  councils  I  will 
persevere.  And  if  a  bountiful  Providence  would  allow  an  unworthy  sinner 
to  approach  the  throne  of  grace,  I  would  beseech  Him,  as  the  greatest 
favor  He  could  grant  to  me  here  below,  to  spare  me  until  I  live  to  behold 
the  peojile  rising  in  their  majesty,  with  a  peaceful  and  constitutional  exer- 
cise of  their  power,  to  expel  the  Goths  from  Rome;  to  rescue  the  public 
treasury  from  pillage,  to  preserve  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States ; 
to  uphold  the  Union  against  the  danger  of  the  concentration  and  consoli- 
dation of  all  power  in  the  hands  of  the  executive  ;  and  to  sustain  the  liber- 
ties of  the  people  of  this  country  against  the  imminent  perils  to  which  they 
now  stand  exposed. 

[Here,  Mr.  Clay,  who  was  understood  to  have  gone  through  the  first  part  of 
his  speech  only,  gave  way,  and  Mr.  Ewing  of  Ohio  moved  that  the  further  con- 
sideration of  the  subject  be  postponed  until  Monday  next ;  which  was  ordered 
accordingly.  And  then  the  Senate  adjourned  to  that  day.  December  30th, 
Mr.  Clay  resumed  his  speech]. 

Before  I  proceed  to  a  consideration  of  the  report  of  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury,  and  the  second  resolution,  I  wish  to  anticipate  and  answer  an  ob- 
jection, which  may  be  made  to  the  adoption  of  the  first.  It  may  be 
urged,  that  the  Senate,  being,  in  a  certain  contingency,  a  court  of  im- 
peachment, ought  not  to  prejudge  a  question  which  it  may  be  called  upon 
to  decide  judicially.  But  by  the  Constitution  the  Senate  has  three  charac- 
ters, legislative,  executive,  and  judicial.  Its  ordinary,  and  by  far  its  most 
important  character,  is  that  of  its  being  a  component  part  of  the  legislative 
department.  Only  three  or  four  cases,  since  the  establishment  of  the  gov- 
ernment (that  is,  during  a  period  of  nearly  half  a  century)  have  occurred, 
in  which  it  was  necessary  that  the  Senate  should  act  as  a  judicial  tribunal, 
the  least  important  of  all  its  characters.  Now  it  would  be  most  strange  if, 
when  its  constitutional  powers  were  assailed,  it  could  not  assert  and  vindi- 
cate them,  because,  by  possibility,  it  might  be  required  to  act  as  a  court  of 
justice.  The  first  resolution  asserts,  only,  that  the  president  has  assumed 
the  exercise  of  a  power  over  the  public  treasury  not  granted  by  the  Con- 
stitution and  laws.  It  is  silent  as  to  motive  ;  and  without  the  quo  animo — 
the  deliberate  purpose  of  usurpation — the  president  would  not  be  liable  to 


596  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY   CLAY. 

impeachment.  But  if  a  concurrence  of  all  the  elements  be  necessary  to 
make  out  a  charge  of  willful  violation  of  the  Constitution,  docs  any  one  be- 
lieve that  the  president  will  now  be  impeached  ?  And  shall  we  silently  sit 
by  and  see  ourselves  stripped  of  one  of  the  most  essential  of  our  legisla- 
tive powers,  and  the  exercise  of  it  assumed  by  the  president,  to  which  it  is 
not  delegated,  without  effort  to  maintain  it,  because,  against  all  human 
probability,  he  may  be  hereafter  impeached  ? 

The  report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  in  the  first  paragraph,  com- 
mences with  a  misstatement  of  the  fact.  He  says,  "  I  have  directed"  that 
the  deposits  of  the  money  of  the  United  States  shall  not  be  made  in  (he 
bank  of  the  United  States.  If  this  assertion  is  regarded  in  any  other  than 
a  mere  formal  sense,  it  is  not  true.  The  secretary  may  have  been  the  in- 
strument, the  clerk,  the  automaton,  in  whose  name  the  order  was  issued ; 
but  the  measure  was  that  of  the  president,  by  whose  authority  or  com- 
mand the  order  was  given  ;  and  of  this  we  have  the  highest  and  most 
authentic  evidence.  The  president  has  told  the  world  that  the  measure 
was  his  own,  and  that  he  took  it  upon  his  own  responsibility.  And  he  has 
exonerated  his  cabinet  from  all  responsibility  about  it.  The  secretary  ought 
to  have  frankly  disclosed  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  and  told  the 
truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth.  If  he  had  done  so,  he 
would  have  informed  Congress,  that  the  removal  had  been  decided  by  the 
president  on  the  18th  of  September  last ;  that  it  had  been  announced  to 
the  public  on  the  20th;  and  that  Mr.  Duane  remained  in  office  until  the 
23d.  He  would  have  informed  Congress,  that  this  important  measure  was 
decided  before  he  entered  into  his  new  office,  and  was  the  cause  of  his  ap- 
pointment. Yes,  sir,  the  present  secretary  stood  by,  a  witness  to  the  strug- 
gle in  the  miud  of  his  predecessor,  between  his  attachment  to  the  presi- 
dent and  his  duty  to  the  country ;  saw  him  dismissed  from  office,  because 
he  would  not  violate  his  conscientious  obligations,  and  came  into  his  place, 
to  do  what  he  could  not,  honorably,  and  would  not  perform.  A  son  of 
one  of  the  fathers  of  democracy,  by  an  administration  professing  to  be 
democratic,  was  expelled  from  office,  and  his  place  supplied  by  a  gentle- 
man, who,  throughout  his  whole  career,  has  been  uniformly  opposed  to 
democracy ! — a  gentleman  who,  at  another  epoch  of  the  republic,  when  it 
was  threatened  with  civil  war,  and  a  dissolution  of  the  Union,  voted 
(although  a  resident  of  a  slave  State),  in  the  Legislature  of  Maryland, 
ao-ainst  the  admission  of  Missouri  into  the  Union  without  a  restriction  in- 
compatible  with  ber  rights  as  a  member  of  the  confederacy  !  Mr.  Duane 
was  dismissed  because  the  solemn  convictions  of  his  duty  would  not  allow 
him  to  conform  to  the  president's  will ;  because  his  logic  did  not  bring  his 
mind  to  the  same  conclusions  with  those  of  the  logic  of  a  venerable  old 
gentleman,  inhabiting  a  white  house  not  distant  from  the  capitol ;  because 
his  watch  (here  Mr.  Clay  held  up  bis  own)  did  not  keep  time  with  that 
of  the  president.  He  was  dismissed  under  that  detestable  system  of  pro- 
scription for  opinion's  sake,  which  has  finally  dared  to  intrude  itself  into 


ON   THE   REMOVAL   OF   THE   DEPOSITS.  597 

the  halls  of  Congress — a  system  under  which  three  unoffending  clerks,  the 
husbands  of  wives,  the  fathers  of  families,  dependent  on  them  for  support, 
without  the  slightest  imputation  of  delinquency,  have  been  recently  un- 
ceremoniously discharged,  and  driven  out  to  beggary,  by  a  man,  himself 
the  substitute  of  a  meritorious  officer,  who  has  not  been  iu  this  city  a  period 
equal  to  one  monthly  revolutiou  of  the  moon !  I  tell  our  secretary,  (said 
Mr.  Clay,  raising  his  voice)  that,  if  he  touch  a  single  hair  of  the  head  of 
any  one  of  the  clerks  of  the  Senate  (I  am  sure  he  is  not  disposed  to  do  it), 
on  account  of  his  opinions,  political  or  religious,  if  no  other  member  of 
the  Senate  does  it,  I  will  instantly  submit  a  resolution  for  his  own  dismis- 
sion. 

The  secretary  ought  to  have  communicated  all  these  things ;  he  ought 
to  have  stated  that  the  cabinet  was  divided  two  and  two,  and  one  of  the 
members  equally  divided  with  himself  on  the  question,  willing  to  be  put 
into  either  scale.  He  ought  to  have  given  a  full  account  of  this,  the  most 
important  act  of  executive  authority  since  the  origin  of  the  government ; 
he  should  have  stated  with  what  unsullied  honor  his  predecessor  retired 
from  office,  and  on  what  degrading  conditions  he  accepted  his  vacant  place. 
When  a  momentous  proceeding  like  this,  varying  the  constitutional  distri- 
bution of  the  powers  of  the  legislative  and  executive  departments,  was 
resolved  on,  the  ministers  against  whose  advice  it  was  determined,  should 
have  resigned  their  stations.  No  ministers  of  any  monarch  in  Europe, 
under  similar  circumstances,  would  have  retained  the  seals  of  office.  And 
if,  as  nobody  doubts,  there  is  a  cabal  behind  the  curtain,  without  character 
and  without  responsibility,  feeding  the  passions,  stimulating  the  prejudices, 
and  molding  the  actions  of  the  incumbent  of  the  presidential  office,  it 
was  an  additional  reason  for  their  resignations.  There  is  not  a  maitre 
dliotel  in  Christendom,  who,  if  the  scullions  were  put  into  command  in  the 
parlor  and  dining-room,  would  not  scorn  to  hold  his  place,  and  fling  it  up 
in  disgust  with  indiguant  pride  ! 

I  shall  examine  the  report  before  us,  first,  as  to  the  power  of  the  secre- 
tary over  the  deposits ;  secondly,  his  reasons  for  the  exercise  of  it ;  and, 
thirdly,  the  manner  of  its  exercise. 

First.  The  secretary  asserts  that  the  power  of  removal  is  exclusively  re- 
served to  him  ;  that  it  is  absolute  and  unconditional,  so  far  as  the  iuterests 
of  the  bank  are  concerned  ;  that  it  is  not  restricted  to  any  particular  con- 
tingences  ;  that  the  reservation  of  the  power  to  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury  exclusively,  is  a  part  of  the  compact ;  that  he  may  exercise  it,  if 
the  public  convenience  or  interest  would  in  any  degree  be  promoted  ;  that 
this  exclusive  power,  thus  reserved,  is  so  absolute,  that  the  secretary  is  not 
restrained  by  the  considerations  that  the  public  deposits  in  the  bank  are 
perfectly  safe ;  that  the  bank  promptly  meets  all  demands  upon  it ;  and 
that  it  faithfully  performs  all  its  duties  ;  and  that  the  power  of  Congress,  on 
the  contrary,  is  so  totally  excluded,  that  it  could  not,  without  a  breach 
of  the  compact,  order  the  deposits   to  be  changed,  even  if   Congress 


598  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY   CLAY. 

were  satisfied  that  they  were  not  safe,  or  should  be  convinced  that  the 
interests  of  the  people  of  the  United  States  imperiously  demanded  the 
removal. 

Such  is  the  statement  which  this  unassuming  secretary  makes  of  his 
own  authority.  He  expands  his  own  power  to  the  most  extravagant 
dimensions ;  and  he  undertakes  to  circumscribe  that  of  Congress  in  the 
narrowest  and  most  restricted  limits  !  Who  would  have  expected  that, 
after  having  so  confidently  maintained  for  himself  such  absolute,  exclusive, 
unqualified,  and  uncontrollable  power,  he  would  have  let  in  any  body  else 
to  share  with  him  its  exercise  ?  Yet  he  says,  "  as  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury  presides  over  one  of  the  executive  departments  of  the  govern- 
ment, and  his  power  over  this  subject  forms  a  part  of  the  executive  duties 
of  his  office,  the  manner  in  which  it  is  exercised  must  be  subject  to  the 
supervision  of  the  officer"  (meaning  the  president,  whose  official  name  his 
modesty  would  not  allow  him  to  pronounce)  "  to  whom  the  Constitution 
has  confided  the  whole  executive  power,  and  has  required  to  take  care  that 
the  laws  be  faithfully  executed."  If  the  clause  in  the  compact  exclusively 
vests  the  power  of  removal  in  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  what  has  the 
president  to  do  with  it  ?  What  part  of  the  charter  conveys  to  him  any 
power  ?  If,  as  the  secretary  contends,  the  clause  of  removal,  being  part 
of  the  compact,  restricts  its  exercise  to  the  secretary,  to  the  entire  exclusion 
of  Congress,  how  does  it  embrace  the  president  ?  especially  since  both  the 
president  and  secretary  conceive,  that  "  the  power  over  the  place  of  deposit 
for  the  public  money  would  seem  properly  to  belong  to  the  legislative  de- 
partment of  the  government  V  If  the  secretary  be  correct  in  asserting 
that  the  power  of  removal  is  confined  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury, 
then  Mr.  Duane,  while  in  office,  possessed  it ;  and  his  dismission,  because 
he  would  not  exercise  a  power  which  belonged  to  him  exclusively,  was  it- 
self a  violation  of  the  charter. 

But  by  what  authority  does  the  secretary  assert  that  the  treasury  depart- 
ment is  one  of  the  executive  departments  of  the  government  ?  He  has 
none  in  the  act  which  creates  the  department ;  he  has  none  in  the  Con- 
stitution. The  treasury  department  is  placed  by  law  on  a  different  footing 
from  all  the  other  departments,  wliich  are,  in  the  acts  creating  them, 
denominated  executive,  and  placed  under  the  direction  of  the  president. 
The  treasury  department,  on  the  contrary,  is  organized  on  totally  different 
principles.  Except  the  appointment  of  the  officers,  with  the  co-operation 
of  the  Senate,  and  the  power  which  is  exercised  of  removing  them,  the 
president  has  neither  by  the  Constitution  nor  the  law  creating  the  depart- 
ment, any  thing  to  do  with  it.  The  secretary's  reports  and  responsibility 
are  directly  to  Congress.  The  whole  scheme  of  the  department  is  one  of 
checks,  each  officer  acting  as  a  control  upon  his  associates.  The  secretary 
is  required  by  the  law  to  report  not  to  the  president,  but  directly  to  Con- 
gress. Either  House  may  require  any  report  from  him,  or  command  his 
personal  attendance  before  it.     It  is  not,  therefore,  true,  that  the  treasury 


ON   THE   KEMOVAL   OF   THE   DEPOSITS.  599 

is  one  of  the  executive  departments,  subject  to  the  supervision  of  the  pres- 
ident. And  the  inference  drawn  from  that  erroneous  assumption  entirely 
fails.  The  secretary  appeal's  to  have  no  precise  ideas  either  of  the  Con- 
stitution or  duties  of  the  departments  over  which  he  presides.     He  says : 

"  The  treasury  department  being  intrusted  with  the  administration  of  the 
finances  of  the  country,  it  was  always  the  duty  of  the  secretary,  in  the  ab- 
sence of  any  legislative  provision  on  the  subject,  to  take  care  that  the  public 
money  was  deposited  in  safe-keeping,  in  the  hand  of  faithful  agents,"  and  so 
forth. 

The  premises  of  the  secretary  are  only  partially  correct,  and  the  con- 
clusion is  directly  repugnant  to  law.  It  never  was  the  duty  of  the  secre- 
tary to  take  care  that  the  public  money  was  deposited  in  safe  keeping  in 
the  hands  of  faithful  agents,  and  so  forth.  That  duty  is  expressly,  by  the 
act  organizing  the  department,  assigned  to  the  treasurer  of  the  United 
States,  who  is  placed  under  oath,  and  under  bond,  with  a  large  penalty, 
not  to  issue  a  dollar  out  of  the  public  treasury,  but  in  virtue  of  warrants 
granted  in  pursuance  of  acts  of  appropriation,  "  and  not  otherwise."  When 
the  secretary  treats  of  the  power  of  the  president,  he  puts  on  corsets  and 
prostrates  himself  before  the  executive,  in  the  most  graceful,  courteous,  and 
lady-like  form ;  but  when  he  treats  of  that  of  Congress,  and  of  the  treas- 
urer, he  swells  and  expands  himself,  and  flirts  about,  with  all  the  airs  of 
high  authority. 

But  I  can  not  assent  to  the  secretary's  interpretation  of  his  power  of 
removal,  contained  in  the  charter.  Congress  has  not  given  up  its  control 
over  the  treasury,  or  the  public  deposits,  to  either  the  secretary  or  the  ex- 
ecutive. Congress  could  not  have  done  so  without  a  treacherous  renunciation 
of  its  constitutional  powers,  and  a  faithless  abandonment  of  its  duties.  And 
now  let  us  see  what  is  the  true  state  of  the  matter.  Congress  has  reserved 
to  itself,  exclusively,  the  right  to  judge  of  the  reasons  for  removal  of  the 
deposits,  by  requiring  the  report  of  them  to  be  made  to  it;  and,  con- 
sequently, the  power  to  ratify  or  invalidate  the  act.  The  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury  is  the  fiscal  sentinel  of  Congress,  to  whom  the  bank  makes  weekly 
reports,  and  who  is  presumed  constantly  to  be  well  acquainted  with  its 
actual  condition.  He  may,  consequently,  discover  the  urgent  necessity  of 
prompt  action,  to  save  the  public  treasure,  before  it  is  known  to  Congress, 
and  when  it  is  not  in  session.  But  he  is  immediately  to  report — to  whom  \ 
To  the  executive  ?  No,  to  Congress.  For  what  purpose  ?  That  Congress 
may  sanction  or  disapprove  the  act. 

The  power  of  removal  is  a  reservation  for  the  benefit  of  the  people,  not 
of  the  bank.  It  may  be  waived.  Congress,  being  a  legislative  party  to 
the  compact,  did  not  thereby  deprive  itself  of  ordinary  powers  of  legisla- 
tion. It  can  not,  without  a  breach  of  the  national  faith,  repeal  privileges  or 
stipulations  intended  for  the  benefit  of  the  bank.  But  it  may  repeal, 
modify,  or  waive  the  exercise  altogether,  of  those  parts  of  the  charier 


600  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

which  were  intended  exclusively  for  the  public.  Could  not  Congress  repeal 
altogether  the  clause  of  removal  ?  Such  a  repeal  would  not  injure,  but 
add  to,  the  security  of  the  bank.  Could  not  Congress  modify  the  clause, 
by  revoking  the  agency  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  and  substituting 
that  of  the  treasurer,  or  any  other  officer  of  government  ?  Could  not 
Congress,  at  any  time  during  the  twenty  years'  duration  of  the  charter, 
abolish  altogether  the  office  of  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  and  assign  all 
his  present  duties  to  some  newly-constituted  department  ?  The  right  and 
the  security  of  the  bank  do  not  consist  in  the  form  of  the  agency,  nor  in 
the  name  of  the  agent,  but  in  this :  that,  whatever  may  be  its  form  or  his 
denomination,  the  removal  shall  only  be  made  upon  urgent  and  satisfactory 
reasons.  The  power  of  supplemental  legislation  was  exercised  by  Congress 
both  under  the  new  and  old  bank.  Three  years  after  the  establishment  of 
the  existing  bank,  an  act  passed,  better  to  regulate  the  election  of  directors, 
and  to  punish  any  one  who  should  attempt,  by  bribes,  or  presents  in  any 
form,  to  influence  the  operation  of  the  institution. 

The  denial  of  the  secretary,  to  Congress,  of  the  power  to  remove  the 
deposits,  under  any  circumstances,  is  most  extraordinary.  Why,  sir,  sup- 
pose a  corrupt  collusion  between  the  secretary  and  the  bank  to  divide  the 
spoils  of  the  treasury  ?  Suppose  a  total  non-fulfillment  of  all  the  stipula- 
tions on  the  part  of  the  bank?  Is  Congress  to  remain  bound  and  tied, 
while  the  bank  should  be  free  from  all  the  obligations  of  the  charter  ? 
The  obligation  of  one  party  to  observe  faithfully  his  stipulations  in  a  con- 
tract, rests  upon  the  corresponding  obligation  of  the  other  party  to  observe 
his  stipulations.  If  one  party  is  released,  both  are  free.  If  one  party  fails 
to  comply  with  his  contract,  that  releases  the  other.  This  is  the  funda- 
mental principle  of  all  contracts,  applicable  to  treaties,  charters,  and  private 
agreements.  If  it  were  a  mere  private  agreement,  and  one  party  who  had 
bound  himself  to  deposit,  from  time  to  time,  his  money  with  the  other,  to 
be  redrawn  at  his  pleasure,  saw  that  it  was  wasting  and  squandered  away, 
he  would  have  a  clear  right  to  discontinue  the  deposits.  It  is  true  that  a 
party  has  no  right  to  excuse  himself  from  the  fulfillment  of  his  contract, 
by  imputing  a  breach  to  the  other  which  has  never  been  made.  And  it 
is  fortunate  for  the  peace  and  justice  of  society,  that  neither  party  to  any 
contract,  whether  public  or  private,  can  decide  conclusively  the  question  of 
fulfillment  by  the  other,  but  must  always  act  under  subjection,  for  the  ulti- 
mate decision,  in  case  of  controversy,  of  an  impartial  arbiter,  provided  in 
the  judicial  tribunals  of  civilized  communities. 

As  to  the  absolute,  unconditional,  and  exclusive  power  which  the  secre 
tary  claims  to  be  vested  in  himself,  it  is  in  direct  hostility  to  the  princi- 
ples of  our  government,  and  adverse  to  the  genius  of  all  free  institutions. 
The  secretary  was  made,  by  the  charter,  the  mere  representative  or  agent 
of  Congress.  Its  temporary  substitute,  acting  in  subordination  to  it,  and 
bound,  whenever  he  did  act,  to  report  to  his  principal  his  reasons,  that  they 
might  be  judged  of  and  sanctioned,  or  overruled.     Is  it  not  absurd  to  say 


ON    THE    REMOVAL    OF    THE    DEPOSITS.  601 

that  the  agent  can  possess  more  power  than  the  principal  ?  The  power  of 
revocation  is  incident  to  all  agency,  unless,  in  express  terms,  by  the  instru- 
ment creating  it,  a  different  provision  is  made.  The  powers,  whether  of  the 
principal  or  the  agent,  in  relation  to  any  contract,  must  be  expounded  by 
the  principles  which  govern  all  contracts.  It  is  true  that  the  language  of 
the  clause  of  removal  in  the  charter  is  general,  but  it  is  not,  therefore,  to 
be  torn  from  the  context.  It  is  the  part  only  of  an  entire  compact,  and 
is  so  to  be  interpreted,  in  connection  with  every  part  and  with  the 
whole. 

Upon  surveying  the  entire  compact,  we  perceive  that  the  bank  has  come 
under  various  duties  to  the  public ;  has  undertaken  to  perform  important 
financial  operations  of  the  government ;  and  has  paid  a  bonus  into  the 
public  treasury  of  a  million  and  a  half  of  dollars.     We  perceive  that  in 
consideration  of  the  assumption  of  these  heavy  engagements,  and  the  pay- 
ment of  that  large  sum  of  money  on  the  part  of  the  bank,  the  public  has 
stipulated  that  the  public  deposits  shall  remain  with  the  bank,  during  the 
continuation  of  the  charter,  and  that  its  notes  shall  be  received  by  the 
government,  in  payment  of  all  debts,  dues,  and  taxes.      Except  the  cor- 
porate character  conferred,  there  is  none  but  those  two  stipulations  of  any 
great  importance  to  the  bank.     Each  of  the  two  parties  to  the  compact 
must  stand  bound  to  the  performance  of  his  engagements,  while  the  other 
is  honestly  and  faithfully  fulfilling  his.      It  is  not  to  be  conceived,  in  the 
formation  of  the  compact,  that  either  party  could  have  anticipated  that, 
while  he  was  fairly  and  honestly  executing  every  obligation  which  he  had 
contracted,  the    other  party  might   arbitrarily  or   capriciously  exonerate 
himself  from  the  discharge  of  his  obligations.     Suppose,  when  citizens  of 
the  United  States  were  invited  by  the  government  to  subscribe  to  the  stock 
of  this  bank,  that  they  had  been  told,  that,  although  the  bank  performs 
all  its  covenants  with  perfect  fidelity,  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  may, 
arbitrarily  or  capriciously,  upon  his  speculative  notions  of  any  degree  of 
public  interest  or  convenience  to  be  advanced,  withdraw  the  public  de- 
posits; would  they  have  ever  subscribed?     Would  they  have  been  guilty 
of   the    folly  of  binding   themselves  to  the  performance   of  burdensome 
duties,  while  the  government  was  left  at  liberty  to  violate  at  pleasure  that 
stipulation  of  the  compact  which  was  by  far  the  most  essential  to  them  ? 

On  this  part  of  the  subject,  I  conclude,  that  Congress  has  not  parted 
from,  but  retains,  its  legitimate  power  over  the  deposits ;  that  it  might 
modify  or  repeal  altogether  the  clause  of  removal  in  the  charter ;  that  a 
breach  of  material  stipulations  on  the  part  of  the  bank  would  authorize 
Congress  to  change  the  place  of  the  deposits ;  that  a  corrupt  collusion  to 
defraud  the  public,  between  the  bank  and  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury, 
would  be  a  clear  justification  to  Congress  to  direct  a  transfer  of  the  public 
deposits ;  that  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  is  the  mere  agent  of  Congress, 
in  respect  to  the  deposits,  acting  in  subordination  to  his  principal ;  that  it 
results  from  the  nature  of  all  agency  that  it  may  be  revoked,  unless  other- 


602  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

wise  expressly  provided ;  and,  finally,  that  the  principal,  and  much  less  the 
agent,  of  one  party  can  not  justly  or  lawfully  violate  the  compact,  or  any 
of  its  essential  provisions,  while  the  other  party  is  in  the  progressive  and 
faithful  performance  of  all  his  engagements. 

If  I  am  right  in  this  view  of  the  subject,  there  is  an  end  of  the  argument. 
There  was  perfect  equality  and  reciprocity  between  the  two  parties  to  the 
compact.  Neither  could  exonerate  himself  from  the  performance  of  his 
obligations,  while  the  other  was  honestly  proceeding  fairly  to  fulfill  all  his 
engagements.  But  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  concedes  that  the  public 
deposits  were  perfectly  safe  in  the  hands  of  the  bank ;  that  the  bank 
promptly  met  every  demand  upon  it ;  and  that  it  faithfully  performed  all 
its  duties.  By  these  concessions,  he  surrenders  the  whole  argument,  ad- 
mits the  complete  obligation  of  the  public  to  perform  its  part  of  the  com- 
pact, and  demonstrates  that  no  reasons,  however  plausible  or  strong,  can 
justify  an  open  breach  of  a  solemn  national  compact. 

Secondly.  But  he  has  brought  forward  various  reasons  to  palliate  or 
justify  his  violation  of  the  national  faith ;  and  it  is  now  my  purpose  to 
proceed,  in  the  second  place,  to  examine  and  consider  them.  Before  I 
proceed  to  do  this,  I  hope  to  be  allowed  again  to  call  the  attention  of  the 
Senate  to  the  nature  of  the  office  of  Secretary  of  the  Treasury.  It  is 
altogether  financial  and  administrative.  His  duties  relate  to  the  finances, 
their  condition  and  improvement,  and  to  them  exclusively.  The  act  creat- 
ing the  treasury  department,  and  defining  the  duties  of  the  secretary,  dem- 
onstrates this,  lie  has  no  legislative  powers  ;  and  Congress  has  delegated 
and  could  delegate  none  to  him.  His  powers,  wherever  given,  and  iu 
whatever  language  expressed,  must  be  interpreted  by  his  defined  duties. 
Neither  is  the  treasury  department  an  executive  department.  It  was  ex- 
pressly created  not  to  be  an  executive  department.  It  is  administrative,  but 
not  executive.  His  relations  are  positive  and  direct  to  Congress,  by  the 
act  of  his  creation,  and  not  to  the  president.  Whenever  he  is  put  under 
the  direction  of  the  president  (as  he  is  by  various  subsequent  acts,  especial- 
ly those  relating  to  the  public  loans),  it  is  done  by  express  provision  of 
law,  and  for  specified  purposes. 

With  this  key  to  the  nature  of  the  office,  and  the  duties  of  the  officer,  I 
will  now  briefly  examine  the  various  reasons  which  he  assigns  for  the  re- 
moval of  the  public  deposits.  The  first  is,  the  near  approach  of  the  expira- 
tion of  the  charter.  But  the  charter  had  yet  to  run  about  two  and  a  half 
of  the  twenty  years  to  which  it  was  limited.  During  the  whole  term  the 
public  deposits  were  to  continue  to  be  made  with  the  bank.  It  was  clearly 
foreseen,  at  the  commencement  of  the  term,  as  now,  that  it  would  expire, 
and  yet  Congress  neither  then  nor  since  has  ever  thought  proper  to  provide 
for  the  withdrawal  of  the  deposits  prior  to  the  expiration  of  the  charter. 
Whence  does  the  secretary  derive  an  authority  to  do  what  Congress  had 
never  done  ?  Whence  his  power  to  abridge  in  effect  the  period  of  the 
charter,  and  to  limit  it  to  seventeen  and  a  half  years,  instead  of  twenty  ? 


ON   THE    EEMOVAL   OF   THE   DEPOSITS.  603 

Was  the  urgency  for  the  removal  of  the  deposits  so  great,  that  he  could 
not  wait  sixty  days,  until  the  assembling  of  Congress  ?     He  admits  that 
they  were  perfectly  safe  in  the  bank  ;  that  it  promptly  met  every  demand 
upon  it;  and  that  it  faithfully  performed  all  its  duties.      Why  not,  then, 
wait  the  arrival  of  Congress  ?     The  last  time  the  House  of  Representatives 
had  spoken,  among  the  very  last  acts  of  the  last  session,  that  House  had 
declared  its  full  confidence  in  the  safety  of  the  deposits.     Why  not  wait 
until  it  could  review  the  subject,  with  all  the  new  light  which  the  secre- 
tary could  throw  upon  it,  and  it  again  proclaim  its  opinion  ?     He  came 
into  office  on  the  23d  of  September,  1833,  and  in  three  days,  with  intui- 
tive celerity,  he  comprehends  the  whole  of  the  operations  of  the  complex 
department  of  the  treasury,  perceives  that  the  government,  from  its  origin, 
had  been  in  uniform  error,  and  denounces  the  opinions  of  all  his  prede- 
cessors !     And,  hastening  to  rectify  universal  wrong,  in  defiance  and  in 
contempt  of  the  resolution  of  the  House,  he  signs  an  order  for  the  removal 
of  the  deposits !   It  was  of  no  consequence  to  him,  whether  places  of  safety, 
in  substitution  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States,  could  be  obtained  or  not ; 
without  making  the  essential  precautionary  arrangements,  he  commands 
the  removal  almost  instantly  to  be  made. 

Why,  sir,  if  the  secretary  were  right  in  contending  that  he  alone  could 
order  the  removal,  even  he  admits  that  Congress  has  power  to  provide  for 
the  security  of  the  public  money,  in  the  new  places  to  which  it  might  be 
transferred.     If  he  did  not  deign  to  consult  the  representatives  of  the  peo- 
ple as  to  the  propriety  of  the  first  step,  did  not  a  decent  respect  to  their 
authority  and  judgment  exact  from  him  a  delay,  for  the  brief  term  of  sixty 
days,  that  they  might  consider  what  was  fitting  to  be  done  ?     The  truth  is, 
that  the  secretary,  by  law,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  care  and  safe-keep- 
ing of  the  public  money.     As  has  been  already  shown,  that  duty  is  specific- 
ally assigned  by  law  to   the  Treasurer  of  the  United  States.     And,  iu 
assuming  upon  himself  the  authority  to  provide  other  depositories  than  the 
bank  of  the  United  States,  he  alike  trampled  upon  the  duties  of  the  treas- 
urer, and  what  was  due  to  Congress.     Can  any  one  doubt  the  motive  of 
this  precipitancy  ?     Does  any  body  doubt,  that  it  was  to  preclude  the  action 
of  Congress,  or  to  bring  it  under  the  influence  of  the  executive  veto  ?     Let 
the  two  Houses,  or  either  of  them,  perform  their  duty  to  the  country,  and 
we  shall  hereafter  see  whether,  in  that  respect,  at  least,  Mr.  Secretary  will 
not  fail  to  consummate  his  purpose. 

Second.  The  next  reason  assigned  for  this  offensive  proceeding,  is  the 
re-election  of  the  present  chief  magistrate.     The  secretary  says : 

"  I  have  always  regarded  the  result  of  the  last  election  of  president  of  the  Uni- 
ted States,  as  the  declaration  of  a  majority  of  the  people,  that  the  charter  ought  not 
to  be  renewed."  *  *  *  "  Its  voluntary  application  to  Congress  for  the  renewal 
of  its  charter  four  years  before  it  expired,  and  upon  the  eve  of  the  election  of 
president,  was  understood  on  all  sides  as  bringing  forward  that  question  for  in- 
cidental decision  at  the  then  approaching  election.     It  was  accordingly  argued 


604  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

on  both  sides  before  the  tribunal  of  the  people,  and  their  verdict  pronounced 
against  the  bank,"  and  so  forth. 

What  has  the  secretary  to  do  with  elections  ?  Do  they  belong  to  the 
financial  concerns  of  his  department  ?  Why  this  constant  reference  to  the 
result  of  the  last  presidential  election  ?  Ought  not  the  president  to  be 
content  with  the  triumphant  issue  of  it?  Did  he  want  still  more  vetoes? 
The  winners  ought  to  forbear  making  any  complaints,  and  be  satisfied, 
whatever  the  losers  may  be.  After  an  election  is  fairly  terminated,  I  have 
always  thought  that  the  best  way  was  to  forget  all  the  incidents  of  the 
preceding  canvass,  and  especially  the  manner  in  which  votes  had  been  cast. 
If  one  has  been  successful,  that  ought  to  be  sufficient  for  him  ;  if  defeated, 
regrets  are  unavailing.  Our  fellow-citizens  have  a  right  freely  to  exercise 
their  elective  franchise  as  they  please,  and  no  one,  certainly  no  candidate, 
has  any  right  to  complain  about  it. 

But  the  argument  of  the  secretary  is,  that  the  question  of  the  bank  was 
fully  submitted  to  the  people,  by  the  consent  of  all  parties,  fully  discussed 
before  them,  and  their  verdict  pronounced  against  the  institution,  in  the 
re-election  of  the  president.  His  statement  of  the  case  requires  that  we 
should  examine  carefully  the  various  messages  of  the  president,  to  ascer- 
tain whether  the  bank  question  was  fairly  and  frankly  (to  use  a  favorite 
expression  of  the  president)  submitted  by  him  to  the  people  of  the  United 
States.     In  his  message  of  1829,  the  president  says  : 

"  The  charter  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States  expires  in  1836,  and  its  stock- 
holders will  most  probably  apply  for  a  renewal  of  their  privileges.  In  order  to 
avoid  the  evils  resulting  from  precipitancy  in  a  measure  involving  such  important 
principles,  and  such  deep  pecuniary  interests,  I  feel  that  I  can  not,  in  justice  to 
the  parties  interested,  too  soon  present  it  to  the  deliberate  consideration  of  the 
Legislature  and  the  people." 

The  charter  had  then  upward  of  six  years  to  run.  Upon  this  solemn 
invitation  of  the  chief  magistrate,  two  years  afterward  the  bank  came  for- 
ward with  an  application  for  renewal.  Then  it  was  discovered  that  the 
application  was  premature.  And  the  bank  was  denounced  for  accepting 
the  very  invitation  which  had  been  formally  given.  The  president  pro- 
ceeds : 

"  Both  the  constitutionality  and  the  expediency  of  the  bank  are  well  ques- 
tioned by  a  large  portion  of  our  fellow-citizens." 

This  message  wras  a  noncommittal.  The  president  does  not  announce 
clearly  his  own  opinion,  but  states  that  of  a  large  portion  of  our  fellow- 
citizens.  Now  we  all  know  that  a  large  and  highly  respectable  number  of 
the  people  of  the  United  States  have  always  entertained  an  opinion  adverse 
to  the  bank  on  both  grounds.     The  president  continues : 

"  If  such  an  institution  is  deemed  essential  to  the  fiscal  operations  of  the  gov- 
ernment, I  submit  to  the  wisdom  of  the  Legislature  whether  a  national  one 


ON    THE    REMOVAL   OF    THE   DEPOSITS.  605 

founded  upon  the  credit  of  the  government,  and  its  resources,  might  not  be 
devised." 

Here,  again,  the  president,  so  far  from  expressing  an  explicit  opinion 
against  all  national  banks,  makes  a  hypothetical  admission  of  the  utility  of 
a  bank,  and  distinctly  intimates  the  practicability  of  devising  one  on  the 
basis  of  the  credit  and  resources  of  the  government. 

In  his  message  of  1830,  speaking  of  the  bank,  the  president  says  : 

"  Nothing  has  occurred  to  lessen,  in  any  degree,  the  dangers  which  many  of 
our  citizens  apprehend  from  that  institution,  as  at  present  organized.  In  the 
spirit  of  improvement  and  compromise,  which  distinguishes  our  country  and  its 
institutions,  it  becomes  us  to  inquire  whether  it  be  not  possible  to  secure  the 
advantages  afforded  by  the  present  bank  through  the  agency  of  a  bank  of  the 
United  States,  so  modified  in  its  principles  and  structure,  as  to  obviate  constitu- 
tional and  other  objections." 

Here,  again,  the  president  recites  the  apprehensions  of  "  many  of  our 
citizens,"  rather  than  avows  his  own  opinion.  He  admits,  indeed,  "  the 
advantages  afforded  by  the  present  bank,"  but  suggests  an  inquiry  whether 
it  be  possible  (of  course  doubting)  to  secure  them  by  a  bank  differently 
constructed.  And  toward  the  conclusion  of  that  part  of  the  message,  his 
language  fully  justifies  the  implication,  that  it  was  not  to  the  bank  itself 
but  to  "  its  present  form,"  that  he  objected. 

The  message  of  1831,  when  treating  of  the  bank,  was  very  brief.  The 
president  says: 

"  Entertaining  the  opinions  heretofore  expressed  in  relation  to  the  bank  of  the 
United  States,  as  at  present  organized  "  (noncommittal  once  more ;  and  what 
that  means,  Mr.  President,  nobody  better  knows  than  you  and  I),  "  I  felt  it  my 
duty,  in  my  former  messages,  frankly  to  disclose  them." 

Frank  disclosures !  Now,  sir,  I  recollect  perfectly  well  the  impressions 
made  on  my  mind,  and  on  those  of  other  senators  with  whom  I  conversed, 
immediately  after  the  message  was  read.  We  thought  and  said  to  each 
other,  The  president  has  left  a  door  open  to  pass  out.  It  is  not  the  bank  ; 
it  is  not  any  bank  of  the  United  States  to  which  he  is  opposed,  but  it  is 
to  the  particular  organization  of  the  existing  bank.  And  we  all  concluded 
that,  if  amendments  could  be  made  to  the  charter  satisfactory  to  the  pres- 
ident, he  would  approve  a  bill  for  its  renewal. 

"We  come  now  to  the  famous  message  of  July,  1832,  negativing  the  bill 
to  re-charter  the  bank.  Here,  it  may  be  expected,  we  shall  certainly  find 
clear  opinions,  unequivocally  expressed.  The  president  can  not  elude  the 
question.  He  must  now  be  perfectly  frank.  We  shall  presently  see.  He 
says : 

"  A  bank  of  the  United  States  is,  in  many  respects,  convenient  to  the  govern- 
ment, and  useful  to  the  people.  Entertaining  tins  opinion,  and  deeply  impressed 
with  the  belief  that  some  of  the  powers  and  privileges  possessed  by  the  existing 


606  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

bank,  are  unauthorized  by  the  Constitution,"  and  so  forth.  *  *  *  "I  felt  it 
my  duty,  at  an  early  period  of  my  administration,  to  call  the  attention  of  Con- 
gress to  the  practicability  of  organizing  an  institution,  combining  all  its  advan- 
tages, and  obviating  these  objections.  I  sincerely  regret,  that  in  the  act  before 
me  I  can  perceive  none  of  those  modifications,"  and  so  forth.  *  *  *  "  That  a 
bank  of  the  United  States,  competent  to  all  the  duties  which  may  be  required  by 
the  government,  might  be  so  organized  as  not  to  infringe  on  our  own  delegated 
powers,  or  the  reserved  right  of  the  States,  I  do  not  entertain  a  doubt.  Had  the 
executive  been  called  on  to  furnish  the  project  of  such  an  institution,  the  duty 
would  have  been  cheerfully  performed." 

The  message  is  principally  employed  in  discussing  the  objections  which 
the  president  entertained  to  the  particular  provisions  of  the  charter,  and 
not  to  the  bank  itself;  such  as  the  right  of  foreigners  to  hold  stock  in  it ; 
its  exemption  from  State  taxation  ;  its  capacity  to  hold  real  estate,  and  so 
forth,  and  so  forth.  Does  the  president,  even  in  this  message,  array  him- 
self in  opposition  to  any  bank  of  the  United  States  ?  Does  he  even  oppose 
himself  to  the  existing  bank  under  every  organization  of  which  it  is  suscep- 
tible ?  On  the  contrary,  does  he  not  declare  that  he  does  not  entertain  a 
doubt  that  a  bank  may  be  constitutionally  organized?  Does  he  not  even 
rebuke  Congress  for  not  calling  on  him  to  furnish  a  project  of  a  bank, 
which  he  would  have  cheerfully  supplied  ?  Is  it  not  fairly  deducible,  from 
the  message,  that  the  charter  of  the  present  bank  might  have  been  so 
amended  as  to  have  secured  the  president's  approbation  to  the  institution  ? 
So  far  was  the  message  from  being  decisive  against  all  banks  of  the  United 
States,  or  against  the  existing  bank,  under  any  modification,  that  the  pres- 
ident expressly  declares  that  the  question  was  adjourned.     He  says : 

"A  general  discussion  will  now  take  place,  eliciting  new  light,  and  settling 
important  principles  ;  and  a  new  Congress,  elected  in  the  midst  of  such  discus- 
sion, and  furnishing  an  equal  representation  of  the  people,  according  to  the  last 
census,  will  bear  to  the  capital  the  verdict  of  public  opinion,  and  I  doubt  not 
bring  this  important  question  to  a  satisfactory  result." 

This  review  of  the  various  messages  of  the  president,  conclusively  evinces 
that  they  were  far  from  expressing,  frankly  and  decisively,  any  opinions  of 
the  chief  magistrate,  except  that  he  was  opposed  to  the  amendments  of  the 
charter  contained  iu  the  bill  submitted  to  him  for  its  renewal,  and  that  he 
required  further  amendments.  It  demonstrates  that  he  entertained  no 
doubt  that  it  was  practicable  and  desirable  to  establish  a  bank  of  the 
United  States  ;  it  justified  the  hope  that  he  might  be  ultimately  reconciled 
to  the  continuation  of  the  present  bank,  with  suitable  modifications  ;  and 
it  expressly  proclaimed  that  the  whole  subject  was  adjourned  to  the  new 
Congress,  to  be  assembled  under  the  last  census.  If  the  parts  of  the  mes- 
sages which  I  have  cited,  or  oiher  expressions,  in  the  same  document,  be 
doubtful,  or  susceptible  of  a  different  interpretation,  the  review  is  sufficient 
for  my  purpose  ;  which  is,  to  refute  the  argument,  so  confidently  advanced, 
that  the  president's  opinion,  in  opposition  to  the  present  or  any  other  bank 


ON   THE    REMOVAL    OF    THE    DEPOSITS.  G07 

of  the  United  States,  was  frankly  and  fairly  stated  to  the  people,  prior  to 
the  late  election,  was  fully  understood  and  finally  decided  by  them. 

Accordingly  in  the  canvass  which  ensued,  it  was  boldly  asserted  by  the 
partisans  of  the  president,  that  he  was  not  opposed  to  a  bank  of  the  United 
States,  nor  to  the  existing  bank  with  proper  amendments.  They  main- 
tained, at  least,  wherever  those  friendly  to  a  national  bank  were  in  the  ma- 
jority, that  the  re-election  would  be  followed  by  a  re-charter  of  the  bank, 
with  proper  amendments.  They  dwelt,  it  is  true,  with  great  earnestness, 
upon  his  objections  to  the  pernicious  influence  of  foreigners  in  holding 
stock  in  it ;  but  they  nevertheless  contended  that  these  objections  would 
be  cured,  if  he  were  re-elected,  and  the  bank  sustained.  I  appeal  to  the 
whole  Senate,  to  my  colleagues,  to  the  people  of  Kentucky,  and  especially 
to  the  citizens  of  the  city  of  Louisville,  for  the  correctness  of  this  state- 
ment. 

After  all  this,  was  it  anticipated  by  the  people  of  the  United  States  that, 
in  the  re-election  of  the  president,  they  were  deciding  against  an  institution 
of  such  vital  importance  ?  Could  they  have  imagined  that,  after  an  ex- 
press adjournment  of  the  whole  matter  to  a  new  Congress,  by  the  president 
himself,  he  would  have  prejudged  the  action  of  this  new  Congress,  and 
pronounced  that  a  question,  expressly  by  himself  referred  to  its  authority, 
was  previously  settled  by  the  people  ?  He  claimed  no  such  result  in  his 
message,  immediately  after  the  re-election ;  although  in  it  he  denounced 
the  bank  as  an  unsafe  repository  of  the  public  money,  and  invited  Con- 
gress to  investigate  its  condition.  The  president,  then,  and  the  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury,  are  without  all  color  of  justification  for  their  assertions, 
that  the  question  of  bank  or  no  bank  was  fully  and  fairly  submitted  to  the 
people,  and  a  decision  pronounced  against  it  by  them. 

Sir,  I  am  surprised  and  alarmed  at  the  new  source  of  executive  power, 
which  is  found  in  the  result  of  a  presidential  election.  I  had  supposed 
that  the  Constitution  and  the  laws  were  the  sole  source  of  execntive  au- 
thority ;  that  the  Constitution  could  only  be  amended  in  the  mode  which 
it  has  itself  prescribed  ;  that  the  issue  of  a  presidential  election,  was  merely 
to  place  the  chief  magistrate  in  the  post  assigned  to  him ;  and  that  he  had 
neither  more  nor  less  power,  in  consequence  of  the  election,  than  the  Con- 
stitution defines  and  delegates.  But  it  seems  that  if,  prior  to  an  electionj 
certain  opinions,  no  matter  how  ambiguously  put  forth,by  a  candidate,  are 
known  to  the  people,  these  loose  opinions,  in  virtue  of  the  election,  incor- 
porate themselves  with  the  Constitution,  and  afterward  are  to  be  regarded 
and  expounded  as  parts  of  the  instrument. 

Third.  The  public  money  ought  not,  the  secretary  thinks,  to  remain  in 
the  bank  until  the  last  moment  of  the  existence  of  the  charter.  But  that 
was  not  the  question  which  he  had  to  decide  ou  the  26th  of  September 
last.  The  real  question  then  was,  could  he  not  wait  sixty  days  for  the 
meeting  of  Congress  ?  There  were  many  last  moments,  nearly  two  years 
and  a  half,  between  the  26  th  of  September  and  the  day  of  the  expiration 


608  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

of  tLe  charter.  But  why  not  let  the  public  money  remain  in  the  bank 
until  the  last  day  of  the  charter  ?  It  is  a  part  of  the  charter,  that  it  shall 
so  remain  ;  and  Congress  having  so  ordered  it,  the  secretary  ought  to  have 
acquiesced  in  the  will  of  Congress,  unless  the  exigency  had  arisen  on 
which  alone  it  was  supposed  his  power  over  the  deposits  would  be  exer- 
cised. The-  secretary  is  greatly  mistaken  in  believing  that  the  bank  will 
be  less  secure  in  the  last  hours  of  its  existence  than  previously.  It  will 
then  be  collecting  its  resources,  with  a  view  to  the  immediate  payment  of 
its  notes,  and  the  ultimate  division  among  the  stockholders  of  their  capital ; 
and  at  no  period  of  its  existence  will  it  be  so  strong  and  able  to  pay  all 
demands  upon  it.  As  to  the  depreciation  in  the  value  of  its  notes  in  the 
interior,  at  that  time,  why,  sir,  is  the  secretary  possessed  of  the  least  knowl- 
edge of  the  course  of  the  trade  of  the  interior,  and  especially  of  the  west- 
ern States  ?  If  he  had  any,  he  could  not  have  made  such  a  suggestion. 
When  the  bank  itself  is  not  drawing,  its  notes  form  the  best  medium  of 
remittance  from  the  interior  to  the  Atlantic  capitals.  They  are  sought 
after  by  merchants  and  traders  with  avidity,  are  never  below  par,  and  in 
the  absence  of  bank  drafts  may  command  a  premium.  This  will  continue 
to  be  the  case  as  long  as  the  charter  endures,  and  especially  during  the 
last  moment  of  existence,  when  its  ability  will  be  unquestionable,  Phila- 
delphia being  the  place  of  the  redemption  ;  while  the  notes  themselves  will 
be  received  in  all  the  large  cities  in  payment  of  duties. 

Fourth.  The  secretary  asserts,  that  "it  is  well  understood  that  the  su- 
perior credit  heretofore  enjoyed  by  the  notes  of  the  bank  of  the  United 
States,  was  not  founded  on  any  particular  confidence  in  its  management  or 
solidity.  It  was  occasioned  altogether  by  the  agreement  on  behalf  of  the 
public,  in  the  act  of  incorporation,  to  receive  them  in  all  payments  to  the 
United  States."  I  have  rarely  seen  any  State  paper  characterized  by  so 
little  gravity,  dignity,  and  circumspection,  as  the  report  displays.  The 
secretary  is  perfectly  reckless  in  his  assertions  of  matter  of  fact,  and  cul- 
pably loose  in  his  reasoning.  Can  he  believe  the  assertion  which  he  has 
made  ?  Can  he  believe,  lor  example,  that  if  the  notes  of  the  bank  of  the 
Metropolis  were  made  receivable  in  all  payments  to  the  government,  they 
would  ever  acquire,  at  home  and  abroad,  the  credit  and  confidence  which  are 
attached  to  those  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States  ?  If  he  had  stated  that 
the  faculty  mentioned,  was  one  of  the  elements  of  the  great  credit  of  those 
notes,  the  statement  would  have  been  true ;  but  who  can  agree  with  him, 
that  it  is  the  sole  cause  ?  The  credit  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States  results 
from  the  large  amount  of  its  capital ;  from  the  great  ability  and  integrity 
with  which  it  has  been  administered ;  from  the  participation  of  the  gov- 
ernment in  its  affairs ;  from  its  advantageous  location ;  from  its  being  the 
place  of  deposit  of  the  public  moneys,  and  its  notes  being  receivable  in  all 
payments  to  the  government ;  and  from  its  being  emphatically  the  bank  of 
the  United  States.  This  latter  circumstance  arranges  it  with  the  bank  of 
England,  France,  Amsterdam,  Genoa,  and  so  forth. 


ON   THE    REMOVAL   OF   THE   DEPOSITS.  609 

Fifth.  The  expansion  and  contraction  of  the  accommodations  of  the 
bank  to  its  individual  customers,  are  held  up  by  the  secretary  in  bold  re- 
lief, as  evidences  of  misconduct,  which  justified  his  withdrawal  of  the  de- 
posits. He  represents  the  bank  as  endeavoring  to  operate  on  the  public, 
by  alternate  bribery  and  oppression,  with  the  same  object  in  both  cases, 
of  influencing  the  election,  or  the  administration  of  the  president.  Why 
this  perpetual  reference  of  all  the  operations  of  the  institution  to  the  ex- 
ecutive ?  Why  does  the  executive  think  of  nothing  but  itself ?  It  is  I! 
It  is  I !  It  is  I,  that  is  meant !  appears  to  be  the  constant  exclamation. 
Christianity  and  charity  enjoin  us  never  to  ascribe  a  bad  motive  if  we  can 
suppose  a  good  one.  The  bank  is  a  moneyed  corporation,  whose  profits 
result  from  its  business  ;  if  that  be  extensvie,  it  makes  better ;  if  limited, 
less  profit.  Its  interest  is  to  make  the  greatest  amount  of  dividends  which 
it  can  safely.  And  all  its  actions  may  be  more  certainly  ascribed  to  that 
than  any  other  principle.  The  administration  must  have  a  poor  opinion 
of  the  virtue  and  intelligence  of  the  people  of  the  United  States,  if  it  sup- 
poses that  their  judgments  are  to  be  warped,  and  their  opinions  controlled 
by  any  scale  of  graduated  bank  accommodations.  The  bank  must  have  a 
still  poorer  conception  of  its  duty  to  the  stockholder,  if  it  were  to  regulate 
its  issues  by  the  uncertain  and  speculative  standard  of  political  effect,  rather 
than  a  positive  arithmetical  rule  for  the  computation  of  interest. 

As  to  the  alleged  extension  of  the  business  of  the  bank,  it  has  been  again 
and  again  satisfactorily  accounted  for  by  the  payment  of  the  public  debt, 
and  the  withdrawal  from  Europe  of  considerable  sums,  which  threw  into 
its  vaults,  a  large  amount  of  funds,  which,  to  be  productive,  must  be  em- 
ployed ;  and,  as  the  commercial  wants  proceeding  from  extraordinary  activity 
of  business,  created  great  demands  about  the  same  period  for  bank  accom- 
modations, the  institution  naturally  enlarged  its  transactions.  It  would  have 
been  treacherous  to  the  best  interests  of  its  constituents  if  it  had  not  done 
so.  The  recent  contraction  of  its  business  is  the  result  of  an  obvious  cause. 
Notwithstanding  the  confidence  in  it,  manifested  by  one  of  the  last  acts 
of  the  last  House  of  Representatives,  Congress  had  scarcely  left  the  District 
before  measures  were  put  in  operation  to  circumvent  its  authority.  De- 
nunciations and  threats  were  put  forth  against  it.  Rumors,  stamped  with 
but  too  much  authority,  were  circulated,  of  the  intention  of  the  executive 
to  disregard  the  admonition  of  the  House  of  Representatives.  An  agent 
was  sent  out — and  then  such  an  agent — to  sound  the  local  institutions  as 
to  the  terms  on  which  they  would  receive  the  deposits.  Was  the  bank, 
who  could  not  be  ignorant  of  all  this,  to  sit  carelessly  by,  without  taking 
any  precautionary  measures  ?  The  prudent  mariner,  when  he  sees  the 
coming  storm,  furls  his  sails,  and  prepares  for  all  its  rage.  The  bank 
knew  that  the  executive  was  in  open  hostility  to  it,  and  that  it  had  nothing 
to  expect  from  its  forbearance.  It  had  numerous  points  to  defend,  the 
strength  or  weakness  of  all  of  which  was  well  known  from  its  weekly  re- 
turns to  the  secretary,  and  it  could  not  possibly  know  at  which  the  first 

39 


610  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

mortal  stroke  would  be  aimed.  If,  on  the  20th  of  September  last,  instead 
of  the  manifesto  of  the  president  against  the  bank,  he  had  officially  an- 
nounced, that  he  did  not  mean  to  make  war  upon  the  bank,  and  intended 
to  allow  the  public  deposits  to  remain  until  the  pleasure  of  Congress  was 
expressed,  public  confidence  would  have  been  assured  and  unshaken,  the 
business  of  the  country  continued  in  quiet  and  prosperity,  and  the  numerous 
bankruptcies  in  our  commercial  cities  averted.  The  wisdom  of  human  ac- 
tions is  better  known  in  their  results  than  at  their  inception.  That  of  the 
bank  is  manifest  from  all  that  has  happened,  and  especially  from  its  actual 
condition  of  perfect  security. 

Sixth.  The  secretary  complains  of  misconduct  of  the  bank  in  dele- 
gating to  the  committee  of  exchange  the  transaction  of  important  business, 
and  in  that  committee's  being  appointed  by  the  president  and  not  the 
board,  by  which  the  government  directors  have  been  excluded.  The  di- 
rectors who  compose  the  board  meet  only  periodically.  Deriving  no  com- 
pensation from  their  places,  which  the  charter,  indeed,  prohibits  them 
from  receiving,  it  can  not  be  expected  that  they  should  be  constantly  in 
session.  They  must,  necessarily,  therefore,  devolve  a  great  part  of  the  bus- 
iness of  the  bank  in  its  details,  upon  the  officers  and  servants  of  the 
corporation.  It  is  sufficient,  if  the  board  controls,  governs,  and  directs 
the  whole  machine.  The  most  important  operation  of  a  bank,  is  that  of 
paying  out  its  cash,  and  that  the  cashier  or  teller  and  not  the  board  per- 
forms. As  to  committees  of  exchange,  the  board  not  being  always  in 
session,  it  is  evident  that  the  convenience  of  the  public  requires  that  there 
should  be  some  authority  at  the  bank  daily,  to  pass  daily  upon  bills,  either 
in  the  sale  or  purchase,  as  the  wants  of  the  community  require.  Every 
bank,  I  believe,  that  docs  business  to  any  extent,  has  a  committee  of  ex- 
change, similar  to  that  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States.  In  regard  to 
the  mode  of  appointment  by  the  president  of  the  board,  it  is  in  conformity 
with  the  invariable  usage  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  with  the  j>rac- 
tice  of  the  Senate  for  several  years,  and,  until  altered  at  the  commence- 
ment of  this  session,  with  the  usage,  in  a  great  variety,  if  not  all  of  the 
State  Legislatures,  and  with  that  which  prevails  in  our  popular  assemblies. 
The  president,  speaker,  chairman,  moderator,  almost  uniformly  appoints 
committees.  That  none  of  the  government  directors  have  been  on  the 
committee  of  exchange,  has  proceeded,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  from  their 
not  being  entitled,  from  their  skill  and  experience,  and  standing  in  society, 
to  be  put  there.  The  government  directors  stand  upon  the  same  equal 
footing  with  those  appointed  by  the  stockholders.  When  appointed,  they 
are  thrown  into  the  mass,  and  must  take  their  fair  chances  with  their  col- 
leagues. If  the  President  of  the  United  States  will  nominate  men  of  high 
character  and  credit,  of  known  experience  and  knowledge  in  business,  they 
will,  no  doubt,  be  placed  in  corresponding  stations.  If  he  appoints  differ- 
ent men,  he  can  not  expect  it.  Banks  are  exactly  the  places  where  cur- 
rency and  value  are  well  understood  and  duly  estimated.     A  piece  of  coin, 


ON  THE    REMOVAL   OF   THE   DEPOSITS.  611 

having  even  the  stamp  of  the  government,  will  not  pass,  unless  the  metal 
is  pure. 

Seventh.  The  French  bill  formed  another  topic  of  great  complaint  with 
the  secretary.  The  state  of  the  case  is,  that  the  government  sold  to  the 
bank  a  bill  on  that  of  France  for  nine  hundred  thousand  dollars,  which 
the  bank  sold  in  London,  whence  it  was  sent  by  the  purchaser  to  Paris  to 
receive  the  amount.  When  the  bank  purchased  the  bill,  it  paid  the  amount 
to  the  government,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  passed  it  to  the  credit  of 
the  treasury,  to  be  used  on  demand.  The  bill  was  protested  in  Paris,  and 
the  agents  of  the  bank,  to  avoid  its  being  liable  to  damages,  took  up  the 
bill  on  account  of  the  bank.  The  bill  being  dishonored,  the  bank  comes 
back  on  the  drawer,  and  demands  the  customary  damages  due  according 
to  the  course  of  all  such  transactions.  The  complaint  of  the  secretary  is, 
that  the  bank  took  up  the  bill  to  save  its  own  credit,  and  that  it  did  not 
do  it  on  account  of  the  government ;  in  other  words,  that  the  bank  did 
not  advance  at  Paris  nine  hundred  thousand  dollars  to  the  government  on 
account  of  a  bill  which  it  had  already  paid,  every  dollar,  at  Philadelphia. 
"Why,  sir,  has  the  secretary  read  the  charter  ?  If  he  has,  he  must  have 
known  that  the  bank  could  not  have  advanced  the  nine  hundred  thou- 
sand dollars  for  the  government  at  Paris,  without  subjecting  itself  to 
a  penalty  of  three  times  the  amouut  (two  million  and  seven  hundred 
thousand  dollars).  The  thirteenth  section  of  the  charter  is  express  and 
positive  : 

"  That  if  the  said  corporation  shall  advance  or  lend  any  sum  of  money  for  the 
use  or  on  account  of  the  government  of  the  United  States,  to  an  amount  ex- 
ceeding five  hundred  thousand  dollars,  all  persons  concerned  in  making  such  un- 
lawful advances  or  loan,  shall  forfeit  treble  the  amount,  one  fifth  to  the  informer," 
and  so  forth. 

Eighth.  The  last  reason  which  I  shall  notice  of  the  secretary  is,  that 
this  ambitious  corporation  aspires  to  possess  political  power.  Those  m  the 
actual  possession  of  power,  especially  when  they  have  grossly  abused  it, 
are  perpetually  dreading  its  loss.  The  miser  does  not  cling  to  his  treasure 
with  a  more  death-like  grasp.  Their  suspicions  are  always  active  and  on 
the  alert.  In  every  form  thoy  behold  a  rival,  and  every  breeze  comes 
charged  with  alarm  and  dread.  A  thousand  specters  glide  before  their  af- 
frighted imaginations,  and  they  see,  in  every  attempt  to  enlighten  those 
who  have  placed  them  in  office,  a  sinister  design  to  snatch  from  them  their 
authority.  On  what  other  principles  can  we  account  for  the  extravagant 
charges  brought  forward  by  the  secretary  against  the  bank  ?  More  ground- 
less and  reckless  assertions  than  those  which  he  has  allowed  himself  to 
embody  in  his  report,  never  were  presented  to  a  deceived,  insulted,  and 
outraged  people.  Suffer  me,  sir,  to  group  some  of  them.  He  asserts, 
"  that  there  is  sufficient  evidence  to  prove  that  the  bank  has  used  its  means 
to  obtain  politicalpower ;"  that,  in  the  presidential  election,  "  the  bank  took 


612  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

an  open  and  direct  interest,  demonstrating  that  it  was  using  its  money  for 
the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  hold  upon  the  people  of  this  country ;"  that  it 
"  entered  the  political  arena ;"  that  it  circulated  publications  containing 
"  attacks  on  the  officers  of  government ;"  that  "  it  is  now  openly  in  the 
field  as  a  political  partisan  ;"  that  there  are  "  positive  proofs"  of  the  efforts 
of  the  bank  to  obtain  power.  And,  finally,  he  concludes,  as  a  demonstrated 
proposition  : 

"Fourthly,  that  there  is  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the  bank  has  been 
and  still  is  seeking  to  obtain  political  power,  and  has  used  its  money  for  the  pur- 
pose of  influencing  the  election  of  the  public  servants." 

After  all  this,  who  can  doubt  that  this  ambitious  corporation  is  a  candi- 
date for  the  next  presidency  ?  Or,  if  it  can  moderate  its  lofty  pretensions, 
that  it  means  at  least  to  go  for  the  office  of  Secretary  of  the  Treasury, 
upon  the  next  removal  ?  But,  sir,  where  are  the  proofs  of  these  political 
designs  ?  Can  any  thing  be  more  reckless  than  these  confident  assertions 
of  the  secretary  ?  Let  us  have  the  proofs ;  I  call  for  the  proofs.  The 
bank  has  been  the  constant  object,  for  years,  of  vituperation  and  calumny. 
It  has  been  assailed  in  every  form  of  bitterness  and  malignity.  Its  opera- 
tions have  been  misrepresented  ;  attempts  have  been  made  to  destroy  its 
credit,  and  the  public  confidence  in  its  integrity  and  solidity  ;  and  the  char- 
acter of  its  officers  has  been  assailed.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  has 
dared  to  defend  itself.  It  has  circulated  public  documents,  speeches  of 
members  of  Congress,  reports  made  by  chairmen  of  committees,  friends  01 
the  administration,  and  other  papers.  And,  as  it  was  necessary  to  make 
the  defense  commensurate  with  the  duration  and  the  extensive  theater  of 
the  attack,  it  has  been  compelled  to  incur  a  heavy  expense  to  save  itself 
from  threatened  destruction.  It  has  openly  avowed,  and  yet  avows,  its 
right  and  purpose  to  defend  itself.  All  this  was  known  to  the  last  Con- 
gress. Not  a  solitary  material  fact  has  been  since  disclosed.  And  when 
before,  in  a  country  where  the  press  is  free,  was  it  deemed  criminal  for  any 
body  to  defend  itself  ?  Who  invested  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  with 
power  to  interpose  himself  between  the  people,  and  light,  and  intelligence  ? 
Who  gave  him  the  right  to  dictate  what  information  should  be  communi- 
cated to  the  people  and  by  whom  ?  Whence  does  he  derive  his  jurisdic- 
tion ?  Who  made  him  censor  of  the  public  press  ?  From  what  new  sedi- 
tion law  does  he  deduce  his  authority  ?  Is  the  superintendence  of  the 
American  press  a  part  of  the  financial  duty  of  a  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  ? 
Why  did  he  not  lay  the  whole  case  before  Congress,  and  invite  the  revival 
of  the  old  sedition  law  ?  Why  anticipate  the  arrival  of  their  session  ? 
Why  usurp  the  authority  of  the  only  department  of  government  compe- 
tent to  apply  a  remedy,  if  there  be  any  power  to  abridge  the  freedom  of  the 
press  ?  If  the  secretary  wishes  to  purify  the  press,  he  has  a  most  hercu- 
lean duty  before  him.  And  when  he  sallies  out  on  his  quixotic  expedition, 
he  had  better  begin  with  the  Augean  stable,  the  press  nearest  to  him,  his 
organ,  as  most  needing  purification. 


ON   THE   REMOVAL   OF   THE   DEPOSITS.  613 

I  have  done  with  the  secretary's  reasons.  They  have  been  weighed  and 
found  wanting.  There  was  not  only  no  financial  motive  for  his  acting — 
the  sole  motive  which  he  could  officially  entertain — but  every  financial  con- 
sideration forbade  him  to  act.  I  proceed  now,  in  the  third  and  last  place,  to 
examine  the  manner  in  which  he  has  exercised  his  power  over  the  de- 
posits. 

Thirdly.  The  whole  people  of  the  United  States  derive  an  interest  from 
the  public  deposits  in  the  bank  of  the  United  States,  as  a  stockholder,  in 
that  institution.  The  bank  is  enabled,  through  its  branches,  to  throw  cap- 
ital into  those  parts  of  the  Union  where  it  is  most  needed.  Thus  it  dis- 
tributes and  equalizes  the  advantages  accruing  from  the  collection  of  a  large 
public  revenue,  and  the  consequent  public  deposits.  Thus  it  neutralizes 
the  injustice  which  would  otherwise  flow  from  the  people  of  the  West  and 
the  interior's  paying  their  full  proportion  of  the  public  burdens,  without 
deriving  any  corresponding  benefit  from  the  circulation  and  deposits  of  the 
public  revenue.  The  use  of  the  capital  of  the  bank  has  been  signally 
beneficial  to  the  West.  We  there  want  capital,  domestic,  foreign — any  cap- 
ital that  we  can  honestly  get.  We  want  it  to  stimulate  enterprise,  to  give 
activity  to  business,  and  to  develop  the  vast  resources  which  the  bounty 
of  nature  has  concentrated  in  that  region.  But,  by  the  secretary's  finan- 
cial arrangements,  the  twenty-five  or  thirty  millions  of  the  public  revenue 
collected  from  all  the  people  of  the  United  States  (including  those  of  the 
West),  will  be  retained  in  a  few  Atlantic  ports.  Each  port  will  engross 
the  public  moneys  there  collected.  And,  as  that  of  New  Yoik  collects 
about  one  half  of  the  public  revenue,  all  the  people  of  the  United  States 
will  be  laid  under  contribution,  not  for  the  sake  of  the  people  of  the  city 
of  New  York,  but  of  two  or  three  banks  in  that  city,  in  which  the  people 
of  the  United  States,  collectively,  have  not  a  particle  of  interest ;  banks, 
the  stock  in  which  is  or  may  be  held  by  foreigners. 

Three  months  have  elapsed,  and  the  secretary  has  not  yet  found  places 
of  deposit  for  the  public  moneys,  as  substitutes  for  the  bank  of  the  United 
States.  He  tells  us,  in  his  report  of  yesterday,  that  the  bank  at  Charles- 
ton to  which  he  applied  for  their  reception,  declined  the  custody,  and 
that  he  has  yet  found  no  other  bank  willing  to  assume  it.  But  he  states 
that  the  public  interest  does  not  in  consequence  suffer.  No !  What  is 
done  with  the  public  moneys  constantly  receiving  in  the  important  port  of 
Charleston,  the  largest  port  (New  Orleans  excepted),  from  the  Potomac 
to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  ?  What  with  the  revenue  bonds  ?  It  appears  that 
he  has  not  yet  received  the  charters  from  all  the  banks  selected  as  places  of 
deposit.  Can  any  thing  be  more  improvident  than  that  the  secretary  should 
undertake  to  contract  with  banks,  without  knowing  their  power  and  capa- 
city to  contract  by  their  charters  ?  That  he  should  venture  to  deposit  the 
people's  money  in  banks,  without  a  full  knowledge  of  every  thing  respect- 
ing their  actual  condition  ?  But  he  has  found  some  banks  willing  to  re- 
ceive the  public  deposits,  and  he  has  entered  into  contracts  with  them. 


614  SPEECHES   OF   HENKY   CLAY. 

And  the  very  first  step  he  has  taken,  has  been  in  direct  violation  of  an  ex- 
press and  positive  statute  of  the  United  States.  By  the  act  of  the  first  of 
May,  1820,  section  sixth,  it  is  enacted  : 

"  That  no  contract  shall  hereafter  be  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  or  of 
the  Treasury,  or  of  the  Department  of  War,  or  of  the  Navy,  except  under  a  law 
authorizing  the  same,  or  under  an  appropriation  adequate  to  its  fulfilment ;  and 
excepting,  also,  contracts  for  the  subsistence  and  clothing  of  the  army  or  navy, 
and  contracts  by  the  quarter-master's  department,  may  be  made  by  the  secreta- 
ries of  those  departments." 

Now,  sir,  what  law  authorized  these  contracts  with  the  local  banks, 
made  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  ?  The  argument,  if  I  understand 
the  argument  intended  to  be  employed  on  the  other  side,  is  this  :  that  by 
the  bank  charter,  the  secretary,  is  authorized  to  remove  the  public  deposits, 
and  that  includes  the  power  in  question.  But  the  act  establishing  the 
treasury  department  confides,  expressly,  the  safe  keeping  of  the  public 
moneys  of  the  United  States,  to  the  Treasurer  of  the  United  States,  and  not 
to  the  secretary ;  and  the  treasurer,  not  the  secretary,  gives  a  bond  for  the 
fidelity  with  which  he  shall  keep  them.  The  moment,  therefore,  that  they 
are  withdrawn  from  the  bank  of  the  United  States,  they  are  placed,  by  law, 
under  the  charge  and  responsibility  of  the  treasurer  and  his  bond,  and  not 
of  the  secretary,  who  has  given  no  bond.  But  let  us  trace  this  argument  a 
little  further.  The  power  to  remove  the  deposits,  says  the  secretary,  from  a 
given  place,  implies  the  power  to  designate  the  place  to  which  they  shall  be 
removed.  And  this  implied  power  to  designate  the  place  to  which  they 
shall  be  removed,  implies  the  power  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  to  con- 
tract with  the  new  banks  of  deposit.  And,  on  this  third  link,  in  the  chain  of 
implications,  a  fourth  is  constructed,  to  dispense  with  the  express  duties  of  the 
Treasurer  of  the  United  States,  defined  in  a  positive  statute  ;  and  yet  a  fifth, 
to  repeal  a  positive  statute  of  Congress,  passed  four  years  after  the  passage 
of  the  law  containing  the  present  source  of  this  most  extraordinary  chain 
of  implications.  The  exceptions  in  the  act  of  1820,  prove  the  inflexibility 
of  the  rule  which  it  prescribes.  Annual  appropriations  are  made  for  the 
clothing  and  subsistence  of  the  army  and  navy.  These  appropriations 
might  have  been  supposed  to  be  included  in  a  power  to  contract  for  those 
articles,  notwithstanding  the  prohibitory  clause  in  that  act.  But  Congress 
thought  otherwise,  and  therefore  expressly  provided  for  the  exceptions.  It 
must  be  admitted  that  our  clerk  (as  the  late  Governor  Robinson,  of  Louisi- 
ana, one  of  the  purest  republicans  I  have  ever  known,  used  to  call  a  Secre- 
tary of  the  Treasury),  tramples  with  very  little  ceremony  upon  the  duties 
of  the  treasurer,  and  the  acts  of  the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  when 
they  come  in  his  way. 

These  contracts,  therefore,  between  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  and 
the  local  banks  are  mere  nullities,  and  absolutely  void,  enforceable  in  no 
court  of  justice  whatever,  for  two  causes  ;  first,  because  they  are  made  in 


ON    THE    REMOVAL    OF    THE    DEPOSITS.  615 

violation  of  the  act  of  the  1st  of  May,  1820 ;  and,  secondly,  because  the 
treasurer,  and  not  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  alone  had,  if  any  federal 
officer  possessed  the  power  to  contract  with  the  local  banks.  And  here, 
again,  we  perceive  the  necessity  there  was  for  avoiding  the  precipitancy 
with  which  the  executive  acted,  and  for  awaiting  the  meeting  of  Congress. 
Congress  could  have  deliberately  reviewed  the  previous  legislation,  decided 
upon  the  expediency  of  a  transfer  of  the  public  deposits,  and,  if  deemed 
proper,  could  have  passed  the  new  laws  adapted  to  the  new  condition  of 
the  treasury.  It  could  have  decided  whether  the  local  banks  should  pay 
any  bonus,  or  pay  any  interest,  or  diffuse  the  public  deposits  throughout 
the  United  States,  so  as  to  secure  among  all  their  parts,  equality  of  benefits 
as  well  as  of  burdens,  and  provided  for  ample  guaranties  for  the  safety  of 
the  public  moneys  in  their  new  depositories. 

But  let  us  now  inquire,  whether  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  has  exer- 
cised his  usurped  authority,  in  the  formation  of  these  contracts,  with  pru- 
dence and  discretion.  Having  substituted  himself  to  Congress  and  to  the 
Treasurer  of  the  United  States,  he  ought  at  least  to  show  that,  iu  the  stipu- 
lations of  the  contracts  themselves,  he  has  guarded  the  public  moneys  and 
provided  for  the  public  interests.  I  will  examine  the  contract  with  the 
Girard  bank  of  Philadelphia,  which  is  presented  as  a  specimen  of  the  con- 
tracts with  the  Atlantic  banks.  The  first  stipulation  limits  the  duty  of  the 
local  banks  to  receive  in  deposit,  on  account  of  the  United  States,  only  the 
notes  of  banks  convertible  into  coin,  "  in  its  immediate  vicinity,"  or  which 
it  is,  "  for  the  time  being,  in  the  habit  of  receiving."  Under  this  stipulation, 
the  Girard  bank,  for  example,  will  not  be  bound  to  receive  the  notes  of  the 
Louisville  bank,  although  that  also  be  one  of  the  deposit  banks,  nor  the 
notes  of  any  other  bank,  not  in  its  immediate  vicinity.  As  to  the  provi- 
sion that  it  will  receive  the  notes  of  banks  which,  for  the  time  being,  it  is 
in  the  habit  of  receiving,  it  is  absurd  to  put  such  a  stipulation  in  a  con- 
tract,  because  by  the  power  retained  to  change  the  habit,  for  the  time  being, 
it  is  an  absolute  nullity.  Now,  sir,  how  does  this  compare  with  the  charter 
and  bauk  of  the  United  States  ?  The  bank  receives  everywhere,  and  credits 
the  government  with  the  notes,  whether  issued  by  the  branches  or  the  prin- 
cipal bank.  The  amount  of  all  these  notes  is  everywhere  available  to  the 
government.  But  the  government  may  be  overflowing  in  distant  bank 
notes  when  they  are  not  wanted,  and  a  bankrupt,  at  the  places  of  expendi- 
ture, under  this  singular  arrangement. 

With  respect  to  the  transfer  of  moneys  from  place  to  place,  the  local 
banks  require,  in  this  contract,  that  it  shall  not  take  place  but  upon  reason- 
able notice.  And  what  reasonable  is,  has  been  left  totally  undefined,  and 
of  course  open  to  future  contest.  When  hereafter  a  transfer  is  ordered, 
and  the  bank  is  unable  to  make  it,  there  is  nothing  to  do  but  to  allege  the 
unreasonableness  of  the  notice.  The  local  bank  agrees  to  render  to  the 
government  all  the  services  now  performed  by  the  bank  of  the  United 
States,  subject,  however,  to  the  restriction  that  they  are  required  "  in  the 


616  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

vicinity"  of  the  local  bank.  But  the  bank  of  the  United  States  is  under 
no  such  restrictions ;  its  services  are  co-extensive  with  the  United  States 
and  their  territories. 

The  local  banks  agree  to  submit  their  books  and  accounts  to  the  Secre- 
tary of  the  Treasury,  or  to  any  agent  to  be  appointed  by  him,  but  to  be  paid 
by  the  local  banks  pro  rata,  as  far  as  such  examination  is  admissible  without 
a  violation  of  their  respective  charters ;  and  how  far  that  may  be,  the  secre- 
tary can  not  tell,  because  he  has  not  yet  seen  all  the  charters.  He  is,  how- 
ever, to  appoint  the  agents  of  examination,  and  to  fix  the  salaries  which  the 
local  banks  are  to  pay.  And  where  does  the  secretary  find  the  authority 
to  create  officers  and  fix  their  salaries,  without  the  authority  of  Congress  ? 

But  the  most  improvident,  unprecedented,  and  extraordinory  provision 
in  the  contract,  is  that  which  relates  to  the  secruity.  When,  and  not  until 
the  deposits  in  the  local  bank  shall  exceed  one  half  of  the  capital  stock 
annually  paid  in,  collateral  security,  satisfactory  to  the  Sectretary  of  the 
Treasury,  is  to  be  given  for  the  safety  of  the  deposits.  Why,  sir,  a  fresh- 
man, a  schoolboy,  would  not  have  thus  dealt  with  his  father's  guardian's 
money.  Instead  of  the  security  preceding,  it  is  to  follow  the  deposit  of  the 
people's  money  !  That  is,  the  local  bank  gets  an  amount  of  their  money, 
equal  to  one  half  its  capital,  and  then  it  condescends  to  give  security ! 
Does  not  the  secretary  know,  that  when  he  goes  for  the  security,  the  money 
may  be  gone,  and  that  he  may  be  entirely  unable  to  get  the  one  or  the 
other !  We  have  a  law,  if  I  mistake  not,  which  forbids  the  advance  of 
any  public  money,  even  to  a  disbursing  agent  of  the  government,  without 
previous  security.  Yet,  in  violation  of  the  spirit  of  that  law,  or,  at  least, 
of  all  common  sense  and  common  prudence,  the  secretary  disperses  up- 
ward of  twenty-five  millions  of  public  revenue  among  a  countless  number 
of  unknown  banks,  and  stipulates  that,  when  the  amount  of  the  deposit 
exceeds  one  half  of  their  respective  capitals,  security  is  to  be  given  ! 

The  best  stipulation  in  the  whole  contract,  is  the  last,  which  reserves  to 
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  the  power  of  discharging  those  local  bauks 
from  the  service  of  the  United  States  whenever  he  pleases  ;  and  the  sooner 
he  exercises  it,  and  restores  the  public  deposits  to  the  place  of  acknowl- 
edged safety,  from  which  they  have  been  rashly  taken,  the  better  for  all 
parties  concerned. 

Let  us  look  into  the  condition  of  one  of  these  local  banks,  the  nearest  to 
us,  and  that  with  respect  to  which  we  have  the  best  information.  The 
banks  of  this  District  (and  among  them  that  of  the  Metropolis)  are  required 
to  make  annual  reports  of  their  condition  on  the  1st  day  of  January.  The 
latest  official  return  from  the  Metropolis  bank  is  of  the  1st  January,  1832. 
Why  it  did  not  make  one  on  the  1st  of  last  January,  along  with  the  other 
banks,  I  know  not.  In  point  of  fact,  I  am  informed,  it  made  none.  Here 
is  its  account  of  January,  1832,  and  I  think  you  will  agree  that  it  is  a 
Flemish  one.  On  the  debit  side  stand  capital  paid  in,  five  hundred  thous- 
and dollars.     Due  to  the  banks,  twenty  thousand  nine  hundred  and  eleven 


ON    THE    REMOVAL   OF    THE    DEPOSITS.  617 

dollars  and  tea  cents ;  individuals  on  deposit,  seventy-four  thousand  nine 
hundred  and  seventy-seven  dollars  and  forty-two  cents  ;  dividend  and  ex- 
penses, seventeen  thousand  five  hundred  and  ninety-one  dollars  and  seventy- 
seven  cents ;  and  surplus,  eight  thousand  one  hundred  and  thirty-one 
dollars  and  two  cents ;  making  an  aggregate  of  six  hundred  and  eighty- 
four  thousand  four  hundred  aud  ninety-six  dollars  and  thirty-one  cents. 
On  the  credit  side,  there  are  bills  and  notes  discounted,  and  stock  (what 
sort?)  bearing  interest,  six  hundred  and  twenty  six  thousand  and  eleven 
dollars  and  ninety  cents  ;  real  estate,  eighteen  thousand  four  hundred  and 
four  dollars  and  eighty-six  cents ;  notes  on  other  banks  on  hand,  and 
checks  on  the  same,  twenty-three  thousand  two  hundred  and  thirteen 
dollars  and  eighty  cents ;  specie — now,  Mr.  President,  how  much  do  you 
imagine  ?  Recollect,  that  this  is  the  bank  selected  at  the  seat  of  govern- 
ment, where  there  is  necessarily  concentrated  a  vast  amount  of  public 
money,  employed  in  the  expenditure  of  the  government.  Recollect  that, 
by  another  executive  edict,  all  public  officers,  charged  with  the  disburse- 
ment of  the  public  money  here,  are  required  to  make  their  deposits  with 
this  Metropolis  ;  and  how  much  specie  do  you  suppose  it  had  at  the  date 
of  its  last  official  return  ?  ten  thousand  nine  hundred  and  seventy-four  dol- 
lars and  seventy-six  cents :  due  from  other  banks,  five  thousand  eight 
hundred  and  ninety  dollars  and  ninety-nine  cents ;  making  an  aggregate 
on  the  credit  side,  six  hundred  and  eighty-four  thousand  four  hundred  and 
ninety-six  dollars  and  thirty-one  cents.  Upon  looking  into  the  items,  and 
casting  them  up,  you  will  find  that  this  Metropolis  bank,  on  the  1st  day  of 
January,  1832,  was  liable  to  an  immediate  call  for  one  hundred  and 
seventy-six  thousand  three  hundred  and  thirty-five  dollars  and  twenty-nine 
cents,  and  that  the  amount  which  it  had  on  hand,  ready  to  meet  that  call, 
was  forty  thousand  and  seventy-nine  dollars  and  fifty-five  cents.  Aud  this 
is  one  of  the  banks  selected  at  the  seat  of  the  general  government,  for  the 
deposit  of  the  public  moneys  of  the  United  States  !  A  bank  with  a  capital 
of  thirty  millions  of  dollars,  and  upward  of  ten  millions  of  specie  on  hand 
has  been  put  aside,  and  a  bank  with  a  capital  of  half  a  million,  and  a  little 
more  than  ten  thousand  dollars  in  specie  on  hand,  has  been  substituted  in 
its  place !  How  that  half  million  has  been  raised,  whether  in  part  or  in 
the  whole,  by  the  neutralizing  operation  of  giving  stock  notes  in  exchange 
for  certificates  of  stock,  does  not  appear. 

The  design  of  the  whole  scheme  of  this  treasury  arrangement  seems  to 
have  been,  to  have  united  in  one  common  league  a  number  of  local  banks, 
dispersed  throughout  the  Union,  and  subject  to  one  central  will,  with  a 
right  of  or  scrutiny  instituted  by  the  agents  of  that  will.  It  is  a  bad  imita- 
tion of  the  New  York  project  of  a  safety-fund.  This  confederation  of  banks 
will  probably  be  combined  in  sympathy  as  well  as  interest,  and  will  be 
always  ready  to  fly  to  the  succor  of  the  source  of  their' nourishment.  As 
to  their  supplying  a  common  currency,  in  place  of  that  of  the  bank  of  the 
United  States,  the  plan  is  totally  destitute  of  the  essential  requisite.     They 


618  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

are  not  required  to  credit  each  other's  paper,  unless  it  be  issued  in  the 
u  immediate  vicinity." 

We  have  seen  what  is  in  this  contract.  Now  let  us  see  what  is  not 
there.  It  contains  no  stipulation  for  the  preservation  of  the  public  morals  ; 
none  for  tlie  freedom  of  elections ;  none  for  the  purity  of  the  press.  All 
these  great  interests,  after  all  that  has  been  said  against  the  bank  of  the 
United  States,  are  left  to  sbift  and  take  care  of  themselves  as  they  can. 
We  have  already  seen  the  president  of  a  bank  in  a  neighboring  city  rush- 
ing impetuously  to  the  defense  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  against  an 
editorial  article  in  a  newspaper,  although  the  "  venom  of  the  shaft  was  quite 
equal  to  the  vigor  of  the  bow."  Was  he  rebuked  by  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury  ?  Was  the  bank  discharged  from  the  public  service  ?  Or,  are 
morals,  the  press,  the  elections,  in  no  danger  of  contamination,  when  a 
host  of  banks  become  literary  champions  on  the  side  of  power  and  the 
officers  of  government  ?  Is  the  patriotism  of  the  secretary  only  alarmed 
when  the  infallibility  of  high  authority  is  questioned  ?  Will  the  States 
silently  acquiesce,  and  see  the  federal  authority  insinuating  itself  into  banks 
of  their  creation,  and  subject  to  their  exclusive  control  ? 

We  have,  Mr.  President,  a  most  wonderful  financier  at  the  head  of  our 
Treasury  Department.  He  sits  quietly  by  in  the  cabinet,  and  witnesses  the 
contest  between  his  colleague  and  the  president;  sees  the  conflict  in  the 
mind  of  that  colleague  between  his  personal  attachment  to  the  president  on 
the  one  hand,  and  his  solemn  duty  to  the  public  on  the  other ;  beholds  the 
triumph  of  conscientious  obligation ;  contemplates  the  noble  spectacle  of 
an  honest  man  preferring  to  surrender  an  exalted  office  with  all  its  honors 
and  emoluments,  rather  than  betray  the  interests  of  the  people ;  witnesses 
the  contemptuous  and  insulting  expulsion  of  that  colleague  from  office; 
and  then  coolly  enters  the  vacated  place,  without  the  slightest  sympathy 
or  the  smallest  emotion.  He  was  installed  on  the  23d  of  September,  and 
by  the  2Gth,  the  brief  period  of  three  days,  he  discovers  that  the  govern- 
ment of  the  United  States  had  been  wrong  from  its  origin  ;  that  everyone 
of  his  predecessors  from  Hamilton  down,  including  Gallatin  (who,  what- 
ever I  said  of  him  on  a  former  occasion,  and  that  I  do  not  mean  to  retract, 
possessed  more  practical  knowledge  of  currency,  banks,  and  finance,  than 
any  man  I  have  ever  met  in  the  public  councils),  Dallas,  and  Crawford,  had 
been  mistaken  about  both  the  expediency  and  constitutionality  of  the  bank; 
that  every  chief  magistrate,  prior  to  him  wdiose  patronage  he  enjoyed,  had 
been  wrong;  that  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  and  the  people 
of  the  United  States,  during  the  thirty-seven  years  that  they  had  acquiesced 
in  or  recognized  the  utter  utility  of  a  bank,  were  all  wrong.  And,  opposing 
his  single  opinion  to  their  united  judgments,  he  dismisses  the  bank,  scatters 
the  public  money,  and  undertakes  to  regulate  and  purify  the  public  morals, 
the  public  press,  and  popular  elections  ! 

If  we  examine  the  operations  of  this  modern  Turgot,  in  their  financial 
bearing,  merely,  we  shall  find  still  less  for  approbation. 


ON    THE    REMOVAL    OF    THE    DEPOSITS.  619 

First.  He  withdraws  the  public  moneys,  where,  by  his  own  deliberate 
admission,  they  were  perfectly  safe,  with  a  bank  of  thirty-five  millions  of 
capital,  and  ten  millions  of  specie,  and  places  them  at  great  hazard  with 
banks  of  comparatively  small  capital,  and  but  little  specie,  of  which  the 
Metropolis  bank  is  an  example. 

Second.  He  withdraws  them  from  a  bank  created  by,  and  over  which 
the  federal  government  had  ample  control,  and  puts  them  in  other  banks, 
created  by  different  governments,  and  over  which  it  has  no  control. 

Third.  He  withdraws  them  from  a  bank  in  which  the  American  people, 
as  a  stockholder,  were  drawing  their  fair  proportion  of  interest  accruing  on 
loans,  of  which  those  deposits  formed  the  basis,  and  puts  them  where  the 
people  of  the  United  States  draw  no  interest. 

Fourth.  From  a  bank  which  has  paid  a  bonus  of  a  million  and  a  half, 
which  the  people  of  the  United  States  may  be  now  liable  to  refund,  and 
puts  them  in  banks  which  have  paid  to  the  American  people  no  bonus. 

Fifth.  Depreciates  the  value  of  stock  in  a  bank,  where  the  general 
government  holds  seven  millions,  and  advances  that  of  banks  in  whose 
stock  it  does  not  hold  a  dollar ;  and  whose  aggregate  capital  does  not 
probably  much  exceed  that  very  seven  millions.     And,  finally, 

Sixth.  He  dismisses  a  bank  whose  paper  circulates  in  the  greatest  credit 
throughout  the  Union  and  in  foreign  countries,  and  engages  in  the  public 
service  banks  whose  paper  has  but  a  limited  and  local  circulation  in  their 
"  immediate  vicinities." 

These  are  immediate  and  inevitable  results.  How  much  that  large  and 
long-standing  item  of  unavailable  funds,  annually  reported  to  Congress, 
will  be  swelled  and  extended,  remains  to  be  developed  by  time. 

And  now,  Mr.  President,  what,  under  all  these  circumstances,  is  it  our 
duty  to  do  ?  Is  there  a  senator  who  can  hesitate  to  affirm,  in  the  language 
of  the  resolution,  that  the  president  has  assumed  a  dangerous  power  over 
the  treasury  of  the  United  States,  not  granted  to  him  by  the  Constitution 
and  the  laws ;  and  that  the  reasons  assigned  for  the  act,  by  the  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury,  are  insufficient  and  unsatisfactory  ? 

The  eyes  and  the  hopes  of  the  American  people  are  anxiously  turned  to 
Congress.  They  feel  that  they  have  been  deceived  and  insulted ;  their 
confidence  abused ;  their  interests  betrayed ;  and  their  liberties  in  danger. 
They  see  a  rapid  and  alarming  concentration  of  all  power  in  one  man's 
hands.  They  see  that,  by  the  exercise  of  the  positive  authority  of  the  ex- 
ecutive, and  his  negative  power  exerted  over  Congress,  the  will  of  one  man 
alone  prevails,  and  governs  the  republic.  The  question  is  no  longer  what 
laws  will  Congress  pass,  but  what  will  the  executive  not  veto  ?  The  presi- 
dent, and  not  Congress,  is  addressed  for  legislative  action.  We  have  seen 
a  corporation,  charged  with  the  execution  of  a  great  national  work,  dismiss 
an  experienced,  faithful,  and  zealous  president,  afterward  testify  to  his  ability 
by  a  voluntary  resolution,  and  reward  his  extraordinary  services  by  a  large 
gratuity,  and  appoint  in  his  place  an  executive  favorite,  totally  inexperienced 


620  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY   CLAY. 

and  incompetent,  to  propitiate  the  president.  We  behold  the  usual  inci- 
dents of  approaching  tyranny.  The  land  is  filled  with  spies  and  informers ; 
and  detraction  and  denunciation  are  the  orders  of  the  day.  People,  espe- 
cially official  incumbents  in  this  place,  no  longer  dare  speak  in  the  fearless 
tones  of  manly  freedom,  but  in  the  cautious  whispers  of  trembling  slaves. 
The  premonitory  symptoms  of  despotism  are  upon  us ;  and  if  Congress  do 
not  apply  an  instantaneous  and  effective  remedy,  the  fatal  collapse  will  soon 
come  on,  and  we  shall  die — ignobly  die  !  base,  mean,  and  abject  slaves — 
the  scorn  and  contempt  of  mankind — unpitied,  unwept,  unmourned ! 


ON  THE  GENERAL  DISTRESS  CAUSED  BY  THE 
REMOVAL  OF  THE  DEPOSITS. 

IN  SENATE,  MARCH  7,  1834. 

[The  commercial  distress  of  the  country  occasioned  by  the 
removal  of  the  public  deposits  from  the  Bank  of  the  United 
States,  followed  quickly  on  the  heels  of  that  transaction,  as  Mr. 
Clay  had  predicted.  The  following  brief  speech  was  made  on 
the  occasion  of  presenting  a  petition  from  citizens  of  Philadel- 
phia for  relief,  and  it  is  chiefly  remarkable  for  the  earnest  appeal 
which  Mr.  Clay  makes  to  those  members  of  the  Senate  and  oth- 
ers, who  were  political  and  personal  friends  of  General  Jackson, 
to  use  their  influence  with  the  president  to  induce  him  to  relieve 
the  general  distress,  which  it  was  within  his  power  to  do.  The 
principal  appeal  was  to  Mr.  Van  Buren,  the  vice-president,  who 
was  ex  officio  president  of  the  Senate.  Mr.  Clay  was  so  earnest 
in  his  address  to  Mr.  Van  Buren,  that,  without  being  conscious 
of  the  movement,  he  left  his  seat  on  the  outer  circle,  walked 
down  the  aisle,  still  speaking  and  gesticulating,  till  he  stood  on 
the  lowest  level,  with  the  whole  Senate  behind  him,  and  so  near 
the  vice-president's  desk  as  to  be  able  to  lay  his  hand  upon  it — 
still  continuing  his  entreaties.  He  might  wTell  say,  as  he  did  at 
the  close  of  this  appeal :  "  If  I  have  deviated  from  the  beaten 
track  of  debate,  my  apology  must  be  found  in  the  anxious  solici- 
tude I  feel  for  the  condition  of  the  country."  And  yet  he  did 
not  know  that  he  was  down  on  the  floor  in  front  of  the  vice- 
president's  chair.] 

I  have  been  requested  by  the  committee  from  Philadelphia,  charged 
with  presenting  the  memorial  to  Congress,  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  sub- 
ject ;  and  although,  after  the  ample  and  very  satisfactory  exposition  which 
it  has  received  from  the  senator  from  Massachusetts,  further  observations 
are  entirely  unnecessary,  I  can  not  deny  myself  the  gratification  of  com- 
plying with  a  request,  proceeding  from  a  source  so  highly  worthy  of  re- 
spectful consideration. 

And  what  is  the  remedy  to  be  provided  for  this  most  unhappy  state  of 
the  country  ?     I  have  conversed  freely  with  the  members  of  the  Philadel- 


622  SPEECHES    OF    HENKY    CLAY. 

phia  committee.  They  are  real,  practical,  working  men  ;  intelligent,  well 
acquainted  with  the  general  condition,  and  with  the  sufferings  of  their  par- 
ticular community.  No  one,  who  has  not  a  heart  of  steel,  can  listen  to 
them,  without  feeling  the  deepest  sympathy  for  the  privations  and  suffer- 
ings unnecessarily  brought  upon  the  laboring  classes.  Both  t'ne  committee 
and  the  memorial  declare  that  their  reliance  is,  exclusively,  on  the  legislative 
branch  of  the  government.  Mr.  President,  it  is  with  subdued  feelings  of 
the  profoundest  humility  and  mortification,  that  I  am  compelled  to  say,  that, 
/constituted  as  Congress  now  is,  no  relief  will  be  afforded  by  it,  unless  its 
members  shall  be  enlightened  and  instructed  by  the  people  themselves.  A 
large  portion  of  the  body,  whatever  may  be  their  private  judgment  upon 
the  course  of  the  president,  believe  it  to  be  their  duty,  at  all  events  safest 
for  themselves,  to  sustain  him,  without  regard  to  the  consequences  of  his 
measures  upon  the  public  interests.  And  nothing  but  clear,  decided,  and 
unequivocal  demonstrations  of  the  popular  disapprobation  of  what  has 
been  done,  will  divert  them  from  their  present  purpose. 
/-~But  there  is  another  quarter  which  possesses  sufficient  power  and  influence 
to  relieve  the  public  distresses.  In  twenty  four  hours  the  executive  branch 
could  adopt  a  measure  which  would  afford  an  efficacious  and  substantial 
remedy,  and  re-establish  confidence.  And  those  who,  in  this  chamber, 
snpport  the  administration,  could  not  render  a  better  service  than  to  repair 
to  the  executive  mansion,  and,  placing  before  the  chief  magistrate  the  na- 
ked and  undisguised  truth,  prevail  upon  him  to  retrace  his  steps  and  aban- 
don his  fatal  experiment.  No  one,  sir,  can  perform,  that  duty  with  more 
propriety  than  yourself.  You  can,  if  you  will,  induce  him  to  change  his 
course.  To  you,  then,  sir,  in  no  unfriendly  spirit,  but  with  feelings  soft- 
ened and  subdued  by  the  deep  distress  which  pervades  every  class  of  our 
countrymen,  I  make  the  appeal.  By  your  official  and  personal  relations 
with  the  president,  you  maintain  with  him  an  intercourse  which  I  neither 
enjoy  nor  covet.  Go  to  him  and  tell  him,  without  exaggeration,  but  in  the 
language  of  truth  and  sincerity,  the  actual  condition  of  his  bleeding  coun- 
try. Tell  him  it  is  nearly  ruined  and  undone,  by  the  measures  which  he 
has  been  induced  to  put  in  operation.  Tell  him  that  his  experiment  is  op- 
erating on  the  nation  like  the  philosopher's  experiment  upon  a  convulsed 
animal,  in  an  exhausted  receiver,  and  that  it  must  expire  in  agony,  if  he 
does  not  pause,  give  it  free  aud  sound  circulation,  and  suffer  the  energies 
of  the  people  to  be  revived  and  restored.  Tell  him  that,  in  a  single  city, 
more  than  sixty  bankruptcies,  involving  a  loss  of  upward  of  fifteen  millions 
of  dollars,  have  occurred.  Tell  him  of  the  alarming  decline  in  the  value 
of  all  property,  of  the  depreciation  of  all  the  products  of  industry,  of  the 
stagnation  in  every  branch  of  business,  and  of  the  close  of  numerous  man- 
ufacturing establishments,  which  a  few  short  months  ago,  were  in  active 
and  flourishing  operation.  Depict  to  him,  if  you  can  find  language  to  por- 
tray, the  heart-rending  wretchedness  of  thousands  of  the  working  classes 
cast  out  of  employment.    Tell  him  of  the  tears  of  helpless  widows,  no 


ON    THE    PUBLIC    DISTRESS.  623 

longer  able  to  earn  their  bread ;  and  of  unclad  and  unfed  orphans,  who 
have  been  driven  by  bis  policy,  out  of  the  busy  pursuits  in  which  but  yes- 
terday they  were  gaining  an  honest  livelihood.  Say  to  him,  that  if  firm- 
ness  be  honorable,  when  guided  by  truth  and  justice,  it  is  intimately  allied 
to  another  quality,  of  the  most  pernicious  tendency,  in  the  prosecution  of 
an  erroneous  system.  Tell  him  how  much  more  true  glory  is  to  be  won 
by  retracing  false  steps,  than  by  blindly  rushing  on  until  his  country  is 
overwhelmed  in  bankruptcy  and  ruin.  Tell  him  of  the  ardent  attachment, 
the  unbounded  devotion,  the  enthusiastic  gratitude  toward  him,  so  often 
signally  manifested  by  the  American  people,  and  that  they  deserve  at  his 
hands  better  treatment.  Tell  him  to  guard  himself  against  the  possibility 
of  an  odious  comparison,  with  that  worst  of  the  Roman  emperors,  who, 
contemplating  with  indifference  the  conflagration  of  the  mistress  of  the 
world,  regaled  himself  during  the  terrific  scene,  in  the  throng  of  his  danc- 
ing courtiers.  If  you  desire  to  secure  for  yourself  the  reputation  of  a 
public  benefactor,  describe  to  him  truly  the  universal  distress  already  pro- 
duced, and  the  certain  ruin  which  must  ensue  from  perseverance  in  his 
measures.  Tell  him  that  he  has  been  abused,  deceived,  betrayed,  by  the 
wicked  counsels  of  unprincipled  men  around  him.  Inform  him  that  all 
efforts  in  Congress,  to  alleviate  or  terminate  the  public  distress,  are  para- 
lyzed, and  likely  to  prove  totally  unavailing,  from  his  influence  upon  a  large 
portion  of  the  members,  who  are  unwilling  to  withdraw  thcdr  support,  or 
to  take  a  course  repugnant  to  his  wishes  and  feelings.  Tell  him  that,  in 
his  bosom  alone,  under  actual  circumstances,  does  the  power  abide  to  re- 
lieve the  country;  and  that,  unless  he  opens  it  to  conviction,  and  corrects 
the  errors  of  his  administration,  no  human  imagination  can  conceive,  and 
no  human  tongue  can  express,  the  awful  consequences  which  may  follow. 
Entreat  him  to  pause,  and  to  reflect  that  there  is  a  point  beyond  which 
human  endurance  can  not  go ;  and  let  him  not  drive  this  brave,  generous, 
and  patriotic  people,  to  madness  and  despair. 

Mr.  Piesideut,  unaffectedly  in  disposed,  and  unwilling  as  I  am  to  trespass 
upon  the  Senate,  I  could  not  decline  complying  with  a  request  addressed 
to  me,  by  a  respectable  portion  of  my  fellow-citizens,  part  of  the  bone  and 
sinew  of  the  American  public.  Like  the  senator  from  Massachusetts,  who 
has  been  intrusted  with  the  presentation  of  their  petition  to  the  Senate,  I 
found  them  plain,  judicious,  sensible  men,  clearly  understanding  their  own 
interests,  and,  with  the  rest  of  the  community,  writhing  under  the  operation 
of  the  measures  of  the  executive.  If  I  have  deviated  from  the  beaten  track 
of  debate  in  the  Senate,  my  apology  must  be  found  in  the  anxious  solicit- 
ude which  I  feel  for  the  condition  of  the  country.  And,  sir,  if  I  shall  have 
been  successful  in  touching  your  heart,  and  exciting  in  you  a  glow  of  pat- 
riotism, I  shall  be  most  happy.  You  can  prevail  upon  the  president  to 
abandon  his  ruinous  course  ;  and,  if  you  will  exert  the  influence  which 
you  possess,  you  will  command  the  thanks  and  the  plaudits  of  a  grateful 
people. 


ON  THE  STATE  OF  THE  COUNTRY  AFTER  THE 
REMOVAL  OF  THE  DEPOSITS, 

IN  SENATE,   MARCH  14,   1834. 

[We  have  here  another  impromptu  from  Mr.  Clay,  on  present- 
ing several  petitions  for  relief  from  the  effects  of  the  removal  of 
the  deposits.  The  president  had  seized  the  purse  of  the  nation, 
appointed  a  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  and  told  him  what  to  do  ; 
and  he  refused  to  send  his  name  to  the  Senate  for  confirmation. 
The  Secretary,  as  the  agent  of  the  president — constitutionally, 
he  is  the  agent  of  Congress — had  removed  the  public  deposits 
into  such  banks  as  he  could  find  to  take  them,  and  those  people 
who  are  the  soul  of  business  being  in  debt  to  the  bank  of  the 
United  States,  could  get  no  extension,  and  were  called  upon  to 
pay,  as  their  notes  became  due.  This  operated  on  all  classes  of 
the  people,  to  deprive  them  of  a  currency,  and  to  throw  them 
out  of  business.  The  distress  was  universal.  The  powers  of  the 
purse  and  the  sword  were  now  in  the  hands  of  one  man,  and 
Mr.  Taney  was  the  agent  of  the  purse.  There  was  no  mode  by 
which  Congress  could  recover  possession  of  the  purse,  so  long  as 
the  president  refused  to  send  in  the  name  of  his  appointed  agent, 
and  this  he  would  not  do  while  he  feared  the  Senate  would  not 
confirm  his  appointment.  Thus  stood  matters  at  this  time — no 
remedy  for  the  people,  no  remedy  for  Congress.  By  usurping 
the  purse,  the  president  had  usurped  all  power ;  and  he  had 
done  this  in  the  face  of  a  resolution  of  the  House  of  Represent- 
atives, that  the  public  deposits  were  safe  in  the  Bank  of  the 
United  States — which  was,  in  fact,  an  authoritative  prohibition 
of  their  removal.  This  resolution  was  passed  for  the  express 
purpose  of  preventing  it.  The  Constitution  had  purposely  put 
the  national  treasury  in  charge  of  Congress,  that  the  president 
could  never  lay  his  hands  upon  it.  But  General  Jackson  was 
not  a  man  to  stop  for  the  Constitution  or  laws,  and  he  seized 
the  purse.] 


ON   THE   STATE   OF   THE   COUNTRY.  625 

I  am  charged  with  the  pleasing  duty  of  presenting  to  the  Senate  the  pro 
ceedings  of  a  public  meeting  of  the  people,  and  two  memorials,  subscribed 
by  large  numbers  of  my  fellow-citizens,  in  respect  to  the  exciting  state  of 
public  affairs. 

The  first  I  would  offer  are  the  resolutions  of  the  young  men  of  Troy, 
assembled  upon  a  call  of  upward  of  seven  hundred  of  their  number.  I 
have  recently  visited  that  interesting  city.  It  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful 
of  a  succession  of  fine  cities  and  villages  that  decorate  the  borders  of  one 
of  the  noblest  rivers  of  our  country.  In  spite  of  the  shade  cast  upon  it  by 
its  ancient  and  venerable  sister  and  neighbor,  it  has  sprung  up  with  aston- 
ishing rapidity.  "When  I  saw  it  last  fall,  I  never  beheld  a  more  respectable, 
active,  enterprising,  and  intelligent  business  community.  Every  branch  of 
employment  was  flourishing.  Every  heart  beat  high  in  satisfaction  with 
present  enjoyment,  and  hopes  from  the  prospect  of  future  success.  How 
sadly  has  the  scene  changed !  How  terribly  have  all  their  anticipations  of 
continued  and  increasing  prosperity  been  dashed  and  disappointed  by  the 
folly  and  wickedness  of  misguided  rulers  ! 

The  young  men  advert  to  this  change,  in  their  resolutions,  and  to  its  true 
cause.  They  denounce  all  experiments  upon  their  happiness.  They  call 
for  the  safer  counsels  which  prevailed  under  the  auspices  of  Washington 
and  Madison,  both  of  whom  gave  their  approbation  to  charters  of  a  bank 
of  the  United  States. 

But  what  gives  to  these  resolutions  peculiar  interest,  in  my  estimation, 
is,  that  they  exhibit  a  tone  of  feeling  which  rises  far  above  any  loss  of 
property,  however  great,  any  distress  from  the  stagnation  of  business,  how- 
ever intense.  They  manifest  a  deep  and  patriotic  sensibility  to  executive 
usurpations,  and  to  the  consequent  danger  to  civil  liberty.  Thev  solemnly 
protest  against  the  union  of  the  purse  and  the  sword  in  the  hands  of  one 
man.  They  would  not  have  consented  to  such  a  union  in  the  person  of 
the  father  of  his  country,  much  less  will  they  in  that  of  any  living  man. 
They  feel  that,  when  liberty  is  safe,  the  loss  of  fortune  and  property  is  com- 
paratively nothing ;  but  that  when  liberty  is  sacrificed,  existence  has  lost 
all  its  charms. 

The  next  document  which  I  have  to  offer  is  a  memorial,  signed  by  nearly 
nine  hundred  mechanics  of  the  city  of  Troy.  Several  of  them  are  per- 
sonally known  to  me.  And  judging  from  what  I  know,  see,  and  hear,  I 
believe  there  is  not  anywhere  a  more  skillful,  industrious,  and  respectable 
body  of  mechanics,  than  in  Troy.  They  bear  testimony  to  the  prevalence 
of  distress,  trace  it  to  the  illegal  acts  of  the  executive  branch  of  the  gov- 
ernment in  the  removal  of  the  public  deposits  ;  ask  their  restoration,  and 
the  re-charter  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States.  And  the  committee,  in 
their  letter  addressed  to  me,  say, "  We  are,  what  we  profess  to  be,  working 
men,  dependent  upon  our  labor  for  our  daily  bread,  confine  our  attention 
to  our  several  vocations,  and  trust  in  God  and  the  continental  Congress  for 
buch  protection  as  will  enable  us  to  operate  successfully." 

40 


626  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

The  first-mentioned  depository  of  their  confidence  will  not  deceive  them. 
But  I  lament  to  say  that  the  experience  during  this  session,  does  not 
authorize  us  to  anticipate  the  co-operation  in  another  quarter,  which  is  in- 
dispensable to  the  restoration  of  the  Constitution  and  laws,  and  the  recov- 
ery of  the  public  purse. 

The  last  memorial  I  would  present,  has  been  transmitted  to  me  by  the 
secretaries  to  a  meeting  stated  to  be  the  largest  ever  held  in  the  county  of 
Schenectady,  in  New  York.  It  is  signed  by  about  eight  hundred  persons. 
In  a  few  instances,  owing  to  the  subscriptions  having  been  obtained  by 
different  individuals,  the  same  name  occurs  twice.  The  memorialists  bring 
their  testimony  to  the  existence  of  distress,  and  the  disorders  of  the  cur 
rency,  and  invoke  the  application  of  the  only  known,  tried,  and  certain 
remedy,  the  establishment  of  a  national  bauk. 

And  now,  Mr.  President,  I  will  avail  myself  of  the  occasion  to  say  a 
few  words  on  the  subject-matter  of  these  proceedings  and  memorials,  and 
on  the  state  of  the  country  as  we  found  it  at  the  commencement  of  the 
session,  and  its  present  state. 

When  we  met,  we  found  the  executive  in  the  full  possession  of  the  pub- 
lic treasury.  All  its  barriers  had  been  broken  down,  and  in  place  of  the 
control  of  the  law  was  substituted  the  uncontrolled  will  of  the  chief  mao-is- 
trate.  I  say  uncontrolled  ;  for  it  is  idle  to  pretend,  that  the  executive  has 
not  unrestrained  access  to  the  public  treasury,  when  every  officer  connected 
with  it  is  bound  to  obey  his  paramount  will.  It  is  not  the  form  of  keeping 
the  account ;  it  is  not  the  place  alone  where  the  public  money  is  kept ;  but 
it  is  the  power,  the  authority,  the  responsibility  of  independent  officers, 
checking  and  checked  by  each  other,  that  constitute  the  public  security 
for  the  safety  of  the  public  treasure.  This  no  longer  exists,  it  is  gone,  is 
annihilated. 

The  secretary  sent  us  in  a  report  containing  the  reasons  (if  they  can  be 
dignified  with  that  appellation)  for  the  executive  seizure  of  the  public  purse. 
Resolutions  were  promptly  offered  in  this  body,  denouncing  the  procedure 
as  unconstitutional  and  dangerous  to  liberty,  and  declaring  the  total  insuffi- 
ciency of  the  reasons.  Nearly  three  months  were  consumed  in  the  dis- 
cussion of  them.  In  the  early  part  of  this  protracted  debate,  the  supporters 
of  distress,  pronounced  it  a  panic  got  up  for  dramatic  effect,  and  affirmed 
that  the  country  was  enjoying  great  prosperity.  Instances  occurred  of 
members  asserting  that  the  places  of  their  own  residence  were  in  the  full 
enjoyment  of  enviable  and  unexampled  prosperity,  who,  in  the  progress  of 
the  debate,  were  compelled  reluctantly  to  own  their  mistake,  and  to  admit 
the  existence  of  deep  and  intense  distress.  Memorial  after  memorial  poured 
iu,  committee  after  committee  repaired  to  the  capitol  to  represent  the  suf- 
ferings of  the  people,  until  incredulity  itself  stood  rebuked  and  abashed. 
Then  it  was  the  bank  that  had  inflicted  the  calamity  upon  the  country  ; 
that  bank  which  was  to  be  brought  under  the  feet  of  the  president,  should 
proceed  forthwith  to  wind  up  its  affairs. 


ON   THE   STATE   OF  THE   COUNTRY.  627 

And,  during  the  debate,  it  was  again  and  again  pronounced  by  the  parti- 
sans of  the  executive,  that  the  sole  question  involved  in  the  resolutions 
was,  bank  or  no  bank.  It  was  in  vain  that  we  protested,  solemnly  pro- 
tested, that  that  was  not  the  question ;  and  that  the  true  question  was  of 
immensely  higher  import ;  that  it  comprehended  the  inviolability  of  the 
Constitution,  the  supremacy  of  the  laws,  aud  the  union  of  the  purse  and 
the  sword  in  the  hands  of  one  man.  In  vain  did  members  repeatedly  rise 
in  their  places,  and  proclaim  their  intention  to  vote  for  the  restoration  of 
the  deposits,  and  their  settled  determination  to  vote  against  the  re-charter 
of  the  bank,  and  against  the  charter  of  any  bank.  Gentlemen  persisted 
in  asserting  the  identity  of  the  bank  question,  and  that  contained  in  the 
resolutions  ;  and  thousands  of  the  people  of  the  country  are,  to  this  moment, 
deluded  by  the  erroneous  belief  in  that  identity. 

Mr.  President,  the  arts  of  power  and  its  minions  are  the  same  in  all 
countries  and  in  all  ages.  It  marks  a  victim  ;  denounces  it ;  and  excites 
the  public  odium  and  the  public  hatred,  to  conceal  its  own  abuses  and 
encroachments.  It  avails  itself  of  the  prejudices^and  the  passions  of  the 
people,  silently  and  secretly  to  forge  chains  to  inslave  the  people. 

Well,  sir,  during-  the  continuance  of  the  debate,  we  have  been  told 
over  and  over  again,  that,  let  the  question  of  the  deposits  be  settled,  let 
Congress  pass  upon  the  report  of  the  secretary,  and  the  activity  of  business 
and  the  prosperity  of  the  country  will  again  speedily  revive.  The  Senate 
has  passed  upon  the  resolutions,  and  has  done  its  duty  to  the  country,  to 
the  Constitution,  and  to  its  conscience. 

And  the  report  of  the  secretary  has  been  also  passed  upon  in  the  other 
House  ;  but  how  passed  upon  ?  The  official  relations  which  exist  between 
the  two  Houses,  and  the  expediency  of  preserving  good  feelings  and  har- 
mony between  them,  forbid  my  saying  all  that  I  feel  on  this  momentous  sub- 
ject. But  I  must  say,  that  the  House,  by  the  Constitution,  is  deemed  the 
especial  guardian  of  the  rights  and  interests  of  the  people ;  and,  above  all, 
the  guardian  of  the  people's  money  in  the  public  treasury.  The  House 
has  given  the  question  of  the  sufficiency  of  the  secretary's  reasons  the  go- 
by, evaded  it,  shunned  it,  or  rather  merged  it  in  the  previous  question. 
The  House  of  Representatives  have  not  ventured  to  approve  the  secretary's 
reasons.  It  can  not  approve  them  ;  but,  avoiding  the  true  and  original 
question,  has  gone  off  upon  a  subordinate  and  collateral  point.  It  has 
indirectly  sanctioned  the  executive  usurpation.  It  has  virtually  abandoned 
its  constitutional  care  and  control  over  the  public  treasury.  It  has  sur- 
rendered the  keys,  or  rather  permits  the  executive  to  retain  their  custody ; 
and  thus  acquiesces  in  that  conjunction  of  the  sword  and  the  purse  of  the 
nation,  which  all  experience  has  evinced,  and  all  patriots  have  believed,  to 
be  fatal  to  the  continuance  of  public  liberty. 

Such  has  been  the  extraordinary  disposition  of  this  great  question.  Has 
the  promised  relief  come  ?  In  one  short  week  after  the  House  pronounced 
its  singular  decision,  three  banks  in  this  District  of  Columbia  have  stopped 


628  SPEECHES  OF  henry  clay. 

payment  and  exploded.  In  one  of  them  the  government  has,  we  under- 
stand, sustained  a  loss  of  thirty  thousand  dollars.  And  in  another,  almost 
within  a  stone's  throw  of  the  capitol,  that  navy  pension  fund,  created  for 
our  infirm  and  disabled,  but  gallant  tars,  which  ought  to  be  held  sacred, 
has  experienced  an  abstraction  of  twenty  thousand  dollars !  Such  is  the 
realization  of  the  prediction  of  relief  made  by  the  supporters  of  the  exec- 
utive. 

And  what  is  the  actual  state  of  the  public  treasury  ?  The  president,  not 
satisfied  with  the  seizure  of  it,  more  than  two  months  before  the  com- 
mencement of  the  session,  appointed  a  second  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 
since  the  adjournment  of  the  last  Congress.  We  are  now  in  the  fifth 
month  of  the  session  ;  and  in  defiance  of  the  sense  of  the  country,  and  in 
contempt  of  the  participation  of  the  Senate  in  the  appointing  power,  the 
president  has  not  yet  deigned  to  submit  the  nomination  of  his  secretary  to 
the  consideration  of  the  Senate.  Sir,  I  have  not  looked  into  the  record, 
but,  from  the  habitual  practice  of  every  previous  president,  from  the 
deference  and  respect  wtrich  they  all  maintained  toward  a  co-ordinate 
branch  of  the  government,  I  venture  to  say,  that  a  parallel  case  is  not  to 
be  found. 

Mr.  President,  it  is  a  question  of  the  highest  importance,  what  is  to  be 
the  issue,  what  the  remedy,  of  the  existing  evils.  We  should  deal  with 
the  people,  openly,  frankly,  sincerely.  The  Senate  stands  ready  to  do 
whatever  is  incumbent  upon  it ;  but  unless  the  majority  in  the  House  will 
relent,  unless  it  will  take  heed  of  and  profit  by  recent  events,  there  is  no 
hope  for  the  nation  from  the  joint  action  of  the  tw?  Houses  of  Congress 
at  this  session.  Still,  I  would  say  to  my  countrymen,  Do  not  despair.  You 
are  a  young,  brave,  intelligent,  and,  as  yet,  a  free  people.  A  complete 
remedy  for  all  that  you  sutler,  and  all  that  you  dread,  is  in  your  own 
hands.  And  the  events,  to  which  I  have  just  alluded,  demonstrate  that 
those  of  us  have  not  been  deceived  who  have  always  relied  upon  the  virtue, 
the  capacity,  and  the  intelligence  of  the  people. 

I  congratulate  you,  Mr.  President,  and  I  hope  you  will  receive  the  con- 
gratulation with  the  same  heartfelt  cordiality  with  which  I  tender  it,  upon 
the  issue  of  the  late  election  in  the  city  of  New  York.  I  hope  it  will  ex- 
cite a  patriotic  glow  in  your  bosom.  I  congratulate  the  Senate,  the  coun- 
try, the  city  of  New  York,  the  friends  of  liberty  everywhere.  It  was  a 
great  victory.  It  must  be  so  regarded  in  every  aspect.  From  a  majority 
of  more  than  six  thousand,  which  the  dominant  party  boasted  a  few  months 
ago,  if  it  retain  any,  it  is  a  meager  and  spurious  majority  of  less  than  two 
hundred.  And  the  whigs  contended  with  such  odds  against  them — a 
triple  alliance  of  State  placemen,  corporation  placemen,  and  federal  place- 
men, amounting  to  about  thirty-five  hundred,  and  deriving,  in  the  form  of 
salaries,  compensations,  and  allowances,  ordinary  aud  extra,  from  the  public 
chests,  the  enormous  sum,  annually,  of  nearly  one  million  of  dollars ; 
marshaled,  drilled,  disciplined,  commanded.     The  struggle  was  tremen- 


ON   THE   STATE   OF   THE   COUNTRY.  629 

dous ;  but  what  can  withstand  the  irresistible  power  of  the  votaries  of  truth, 
liberty,  and  their  country  ?  It  was  an  immortal  triumph — a  triumph  of  the 
Constitution  and  the  laws  over  usurpation  here,  and  over  clubs,  and  blud- 
geons, and  violence  there. 

Go  on,  noble  city  !  Go  on,  patriotic  whigs  !  follow  up  your  glorious 
commencement ;  persevere,  and  pause  not  until  you  have  regenerated  and 
disenthralled  your  splendid  city,  and  placed  it  at  the  head  of  American 
cities  devoted  to  civil  liberty,  as  it  now  stands  pre-eminently  the  first  as  the 
commercial  emporium  of  our  common  country.  Merchants,  mechanics, 
traders,  laborers,  never  cease  to  recollect,  that  without  freedom,  you  can 
have  no  sure  commerce  or  business  ;  and  that  without  law  you  have  no 
security  for  personal  liberty,  property,  or  even  existence !  Countrymen  of 
Tone,  of  Emmet,  of  Macneven,  and  of  Sampson,  if  any  of  you  have  been 
deceived,  and  seduced  into  the  support  of  a  cause  dangerous  to  American 
liberty,  hasten  to  review  and  correct  your  course !  Do  not  forgot,  that 
you  abandoned  the  green  fields  of  your  native  island  to  escape  what  you 
believed  the  tyranny  of  a  British  king !  Do  not,  I  adjure  you,  lend  your- 
selves, in  this  land  of  your  asylum,  this  last  retreat  of  the  freedom  of  man, 
to  the  establishment  here,  for  you,  and  for  us  all,  of  that  despotism  which 
you  had  proudly  hoped  had  been  left  behind  you,  in  Europe,  forever ! 
There  is  much,  I  would  fain  believe,  in  the  constitutional  forms  of  gov- 
ernment. But  at  last  it  is  its  parental  and  beneficent  operation  that 
must  fix  its  character.  A  government  may  in  form  be  free,  in  prac- 
tice tyrannical ;  as  it  may  in  form  be  despotic,  and  in  practice  liberal  and 
free. 

It  was  a  brilliant  and  signal  triumph  of  the  whigs.  And  they  have  as- 
sumed for  themselves,  and  bestowed  on  their  opponents,  a  demonstration 
which,  according  to  all  the  analogy  of  history,  is  strictly  correct.  It  de- 
serves to  be  extended  throughout  the  whole  country.  What  was  the 
origin,  among  our  British  ancestors,  of  those  appellations  ?  The  tories 
were  the  supporters  of  executive  power,  of  royal  prerogative,  of  the  maxim 
that  the  king  could  do  no  wrong,  of  the  detestable  doctrines  of  passive 
obedience  and  non-resistance.  The  whigs  were  the  champions  of  liberty, 
the  friends  of  the  people,  and  the  defenders  of  the  power  of  their  repre- 
sentatives in  the  House  of  Commons. 

During  our  revolutionary  war,  the  tories  took  sides  with  executive 
power  and  prerogative,  and  with  the  king,  against  liberty  and  independence. 
And  the  whigs,  true  to  their  principles,  contended  against  royal  executive 
power,  and  for  freedom  and  independence. 

And  what  is  the  present  but  the  same  contest  in  another  form  ?  The 
partisans  of  the  present  executive  sustain  his  power  in  the  most  boundless 
extent.  They  claim  for  him  all  executive  authority.  They  make  his  sole 
will  the  governing  power.  Every  officer  concerned  in  the  administration, 
from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  is  to  conform  to  his  mandates.  Even  the 
public  treasury,  hitherto  regarded  as  sacred,  and  beyond  his  reach,  is  placed 


C30  SPEECHES   OF   HENRY   CLAY. 

by  them  under  his  entire  direction  and  control.  The  whigs  of  the  present 
day  are  opposing  executive  encroachment,  and  a  most  alarming  extension 
of  executive  power  and  prerogative.  They  are  ferreting  out  the  abuses 
and  corruptions  of  an  administration,  under  a  chief  magistrate  who  is  en- 
deavoring to  concentrate  in  his  own  person  the  whole  powers  of  govern- 
ment. They  are  contending  for  the  rights  of  the  people,  for  civil  liberty, 
for  free  institutions,  for  the  supremacy  of  the  Constitution  and  the  laws. 
The  contest  is  an  arduous  one;  but,  although  the  struggle  may  be  yet 
awhile  prolonged,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  and  the  spirit  of  our  ancestors, 
the  issue  can  not  be  doubtful. 

Tho  Senate  stands  in  the  breach,  ready  to  defend  the  Constitution,  and 
to  relieve  the  distresses  of  the  people.  But,  without  the  concurrence  of 
another  branch  of  Congress,  which  ought  to  be  the  first  to  yield  it,  the 
Senate  alone  can  send  forth  no  act  of  legislation.  Unaided,  it  can  do  no 
positive  good  ;  but  it  has  vast  preventive  power.  It  may  avert  and  arrest 
evil,  if  it  can  not  rebuke  usurpation.  Senators,  let  us  remain  steadily  by 
the  Constitution  and  the  country,  in  this  most  portentous  crisis  ;  let  us 
oppose,  to  all  encroachments  and  to  all  corruption,  a  manly,  resolute,  and 
uncompromising  resistance ;  let  us  adopt  two  rules,  from  which  we  will 
never  deviate,  in  deliberating  upon  all  nominations.  In  the  first  place,  to 
preserve  untarnished  and  unsuspected  the  purity  of  Congress,  let  us  nega- 
tive the  nominations  of  every  member  for  any  office,  high  or  low,  foreign 
or  domestic,  until  the  authority  of  the  Constitution  and  laws  is  fully  re- 
stored. I  know  not  that  there  is  any  member  of  either  House  capable  of 
being  influenced  by  the  prospect  of  advancement  or  promotion ;  I  would 
be  the  last  to  make  such  an  insinuation  ;  but  suspicion  is  abroad,  and  it 
is  best,  in  these  times  of  trouble  and  revolution,  to  defend  the  integrity 
of  the  body  against  all  possible  imputations.  For  one,  whatever  others 
may  do,  I  here  deliberately  avow  my  settled  determination,  while  I  retain 
a  seat  in  this  chamber,  to  act  in  conformity  to  that  rule.  In  pursuing  it, 
we  but  act  in  consonance  with  a  principle  proclaimed  by  the  present 
chief  magistrate  himself,  when  out  of  power !  But,  alas  !  how  little  has 
he  respected  it  in  power  !  How  little  has  he,  in  office,  conformed  to  any 
of  the  principles  which  he  announced  when  out  of  office  ! 

And,  in  the  next  place,  let  us  approve  of  the  original  nomination  of  no 
notorious  brawling  partisan  and  electioneerer ;  but,  especially,  of  the  re- 
appointment of  no  officer  presented  to  us,  who  shall  have  prostituted  the 
influence  of  his  office  to  partisan  and  electioneering  purposes.  Every  in- 
cumbent has  a  clear  right  to  exercise  the  elective  franchise.  I  would  be 
the  last  to  controvert  or  deny  it.  But  he  has  no  right  to  employ  the  in- 
fluence of  his  office,  to  exercise  an  agency  which  he  holds  in  trust  for  the 
people,  to  promote  his  own  selfish  or  party  purposes.  Here,  also,  we  have 
the  authority  of  the  present  chief  magistrate  for  this  rule  ;  and  the  au- 
thority of  Mr.  Jefferson.  The  senator  from  Tennessee  (Mr.  Grand v),  merits 
lasting  praise  for  his  open  and  manly  condemnation  of  these  practices  of 


OX    THE    STATE    OF    THE    COUNTRY.  631 

official  incumbents.  He  was  right,  when  he  declared  his  suspicion  and 
distrust  of  the  purity  of  the  motives  of  any  officer  whom  he  saw  busily 
interfering  in  the  elections  of  the  people. 

Senators  !  we  have  a  highly  responsible  and  arduous  position ;  but  the 
people  are  with  us,  and  the  path  of  duty  lies  clearly  marked  before  us. 
Let  us  be  firm,  persevering,  and  unmoved.  Let  us  perform  our  duty  in 
a  manner  worthy  of  our  ancestors  ;  worthy  of  American  senators  ;  worthy 
of  the  dignity  of  the  sovereign  States  that  we  represent ;  above  all,  worthy 
of  the  name  of  American  freemen !  Let  us  "  pledge  our  lives,  our  for- 
tunes, and  our  sacred  honor,"  to  rescue  our  beloved  country  from  all  im- 
pending dangers.  And,  amid  the  general  gloom  and  darkness  which  pre- 
vail, let  us  continue  to  present  one  unextinguished  light,  steadily  burning, 
in  the  cause  of  the  people,  of  the  Constitution,  and  of  civil  liberty. 


ON    OUR   RELATIONS   WITH    FRANCE, 

IN  SENATE,  JANUARY  14,  1835. 

[The  government  of  France,  by  a  treaty  with  the  United 
States,  made  in  1831,  had  agreed  to  pay  an  indemnity  to  ns  for 
spoliations  on  our  commerce,  the  first  installment  of  which,  about 
one  million  of  dollars,  was  taken  by  the  Bank  of  the  United 
States,  but  when  presented  for  payment,  it  was  protested,  and 
thrown  back  on  the  Treasury  of  the  United  States.  General 
Jackson,  as  his  nature  was,  resented  it  as  he  would  a  private 
wrong  ;  and  in  his  annual  message  of  December,  1834,  recom- 
mended to  Congress  a  measure  of  reprisals  on  French  commerce 
to  obtain  the  consideration  clue.  This  happened  in  the  reign 
of  Louis  Philippe,  when  the  French  Chambers  refused  to  make 
the  appropriation  to  meet  the  engagement.  Nobody  doubted 
that  it  would  ultimately  be  paid,  the  present  difficulty  being 
supposed  to  be  between  the  French  king  and  the  Chamber  of 
Deputies  ;  and  it  was  a  mere  question  of  national  policy  how 
this  dishonor  of  our  draft  should  be  treated.  General  Jackson's 
feeling  was,  Pay  or  fight — as  no  one  doubted  that  reprisals  would 
bring  on  war. 

Mr.  Clay  was  for  more  moderate  counsels.  He  would  have 
our  rights,  but  not  rush  into  war  without  giving  the  French 
government  a  chance  to  settle  their  own  dissensions.  Being  at 
the  head  of  the  committee  on  foreign  relations  in  the  Senate,  he 
made  an  elaborate  but  conciliatory  report  on  the  subject,  sub- 
mitting the  following  resolution  : 

Resolved  that  it  is  inexpedient,  at  this  time,  to  pass  any  law  vesting  in  the 
president  authority  for  making  reprisals  upon  French  property,  in  the  contin- 
gency of  provision  not  being  made  for  paying  to  the  United  States,  the  indem- 
nity stipulated  by  the  treaty  of  1831,  during  the  present  session  of  the  French 
Chambers. 

General  Jackson's  message  had  gone  before,  and  had  no  doubt 
much  disturbed  the  temper  of  the  French  nation.     The  French 


ON  OUR  RELATIONS  WITH  FRANCE.  G33 

minister  was  immediately  recalled  from  Washington,  and  the 
American  minister  at  Paris  had  received  his  passports.  The 
relations  between  the  two  governments  were  evidently  extremely 
critical.  Mr.  Clay  thought,  if  he  could  obtain  a  unanimous 
vote  of  the  Senate  in  support  of  the  above  resolution,  its  effect 
would  counteract  that  of  the  president's  message,  and  preserve 
peace  ;  and  it  was  accordingly  unanimously  affirmed.  The  in- 
demnity was  paid,  and  the  cloud  of  war  blew  over.  The  effects 
of  General  Jackson's  precipitancy  were  neutralized  by  Mr.  Clay's 
wisdom.  Otherwise  there  would,  in  all  probability,  have  been 
war  between  the  United  States  and  France.] 

It  is  not  my  purpose,  at  the  present  stage  of  consideration  of  this  reso- 
lution, and  I  hope  it  will  not  be  necessary  at  any  stage,  to  say  much  with 
the  view  of  enforcing  the  arguments  in  its  favor,  which  are  contained  in 
the  report  of  the  committee.  In  the  present  posture  of  our  relations  with 
France,  the  course  which  has  appeared  to  me  and  to  the  committee  most 
expedient  being  to  await  the  issue  of  those  deliberations  in  the  French 
Chambers  which  may  even  at  this  moment  be  going  on,  it  would  not  be 
proper  to  enter  at  large,  at  the  present  time,  into  all  the  particulars  touched 
upon  in  the  report.  On  all  questions  connected  with  the  foreign  affairs  of 
the  country,  differences  of  opinion  will  arise,  which  will  finally  terminate 
in  whatever  way  the  opinion  of  the  people  of  this  country  may  so  tend  as 
to  influence  their  representatives.  But,  whenever  the  course  of  things 
shall  be  such  that  a  rupture  shall  unfortunately  take  place  between  this 
country  and  any  foreign  country  (whether  France  or  any  other),  I  take 
this  opportunity  of  saying,  that,  from  that  moment,  whatever  of  energy  or 
ability^  whatever  of  influence  I  may  possess  in  my  country,  shall  be  de- 
voted to  the  carrying  on  of  that  war  with  the  utmost  vigor  which  the  arms 
and  resources  of  the  United  States  can  give  to  it.  I  will  not  anticipate, 
however,  such  a  state  of  things ;  nay,  I  feel  very  confident  that  such  a 
ruptuie  will  not  occur  between  the  United  States  and  France. 

With  respect  to  the  justice  of  our  claim  upon  France  for  payment  of 
the  indemnity  stipulated  by  the  treaty,  the  report  of  the  committee  is  in 
entire  concurrence  with  the  executive.  The  opinion  of  the  committee  is, 
that  the  claims  stipulated  to  be  paid  are  founded  in  justice;  that  we  must 
pursue  them  ;  that  we  must  finally  obtain  satisfaction  for  them,  and  to  do 
so  must,  if  necessary,  employ  such  means  as  the  law  of  nations  justifies,  and 
the  Constitution  has  placed  within  our  power.  On  these  points  there  is 
no  diversity  of  sentiment  between  the  committee  and  the  president ;  there 
could  be  no  diversity  between  either  the  committee  or  the  president  and 
any  American  citizen. 

In  all  that  the  president  has  said  of  the  obligation  of  the  French  govern- 
ment to  make  the  stipulated  provisions  for  the  claims,  the  committee  en- 
tirely concur.     If  the  president,  in  his  message,  after  making  his  statement 


634  SPEECHES   OF    HENKY    CLAY. 

of  the  case,  had  stopped  there,  and  abstained  from  the  recommendation  of 
any  specific  measure,  there  could  not  have  been  possibly  any  diversity  of 
opinion  on  the  subject  between  him  and  any  portion  of  the  country.  But, 
when  he  declares  the  confidence  which  he  eutertains  in  the  French  govern- 
ment ;  when  he  expresses  his  conviction  that  the  executive  branch  of  that 
government  is  honest  and  sincere  in  its  professions,  and  recites  the  promise 
by  it  of  a  renewed  effort  to  obtain  the  passage  of  a  bill  of  appropriation  by 
the  French  Chambers,  it  did  appear  to  the  committee  inconsistent  with 
these  professions  of  confidence,  that  they  should  be  accompanied  by  the 
recommendation  of  a  measure  which  could  only  be  authorized  by  the  con- 
viction that  no  confidence,  or  at  least,  not  entire  confidence,  could  be  placed 
in  the  declarations  and  professions  of  the  French  government.  Confidence 
and  distrust  are  unnatural  allies.  If  we  profess  confidence  anywhere,  es- 
pecially if  that  confidence  be  but  for  a  limited  period,  it  should  be  unac- 
companied with  any  indication  whatever  of  distrust ;  a  confidence  full,  free, 
frank.  But  to  say,  as  the  president,  through  our  minister,  has  said,  that  he 
will  await  the  issue  of  the  deliberations  of  the  Chambers,  confiding  in  the 
sincerity  of  the  king,  and  this,  too,  after  hearing  of  the  rejection  of  the  first 
bill  of  appropriation  by  the  Chambers,  and  now,  at  the  very  moment  when 
the  Chambers  are  about  deliberating  on  the  subject,  to  throw. out  in  a  mes- 
sage to  Congress  what  the  president  himself  considered  might  possibly  be 
viewed  as  a  menace,  appeared  to  the  committee,  with  all  due  deference  to 
the  executive,  and  to  the  high  and  patriotic  purposes  which  may  be  sup- 
posed to  have  induced  the  recommendation,  to  be  inconsistent  to  such  a 
degree  as  not  to  be  seconded  by  the  action  of  Congress.  It  also  appeared 
to  the  committee,  after  the  distinct  recommendation  by  the  president  on 
this  subject,  that  there  should  be  some  expression  of  the  sense  of  Congress 
in  regard  to  it.  Such  an  expression  is  proposed  by  the  resolution  riow  un- 
der consideration. 

In  speculating  upon  probabilities  in  regard  to  the  course  of  the  French 
government,  in  reference  to  the  treaty,  four  contingences  might  be  sup- 
posed to  arise — first,  that  the  French  government  may  have  made  the  ap- 
propriation to  carry  the  treaty  into  effect  before  the  reception  of  the 
president's  message ;  second,  the  Chambers  may  make  the  appropriation 
after  the  reception  of  the  president's  message,  and  notwithstanding  the 
recommendation  on  this  subject  contained  in  it ;  third,  the  Chambers  may, 
in  consequence  of  that  recommendation,  hearing  of  it  before  they  shall 
have  acted  finally  on  the  subject,  refuse  to  make  any  appropriation  until 
what  they  may  consider  a  menace  shall  have  been  explained  or  withdrawn  ; 
or  fourth,  they  may,  either  on  that  ground,  or  on  the  ground  of  dissatis- 
faction with  the  provisions  of  the  treaty,  refuse  to  pass  the  bill  of  appro- 
priation. Now,  in  any  of  these  contingences,  after  what  has  passed,  an 
expression  of  the  sense  of  Congress  on  the  subject  appears  to  me  indispens- 
able, either  to  the  passage  of  the  bill,  or  the  subsequent  payment  of  the 
money,  if  passed. 


ON  OUR  RELATIONS  WITH  FRANCE.  635 

Suppose  the  bill  to  have  passed  before  the  reception  of  the  message, 
and  the  money  to  be  in  the  French  treasury,  it  would  throw  upon  the  king 
a  high  responsibility  to  pay  the  money,  unless  the  recommendation  of  the 
message  should  be  explained  or  done  away,  or  at  any  rate  unless  a  new 
motive  to  the  execution  of  the  treaty  should  be  furnished  in  the  fact  that  tho 
two  Houses  of  Congress,  having  considered  the  subject,  had  deemed  it  in- 
expedient to  act  until  the  French  Chambers  should  have  had  an  opportunity 
to  be  heard  from.  In  the  second  contingency,  that  of  the  passage  of  a  bill 
of  appropriation  after  receiving  the  message,  a  vote  of  Congress,  as  pro- 
posed, would  be  soothing  to  the  pride  of  France,  and  calculated  to  continue 
that  good  understanding  which  it  must  be  the  sincere  desire  of  every  cit- 
izen of  the  United  States  to  cultivate  with  that  country.  If  the  Chambers 
shall  have  passed  the  bill  they  will  see  that  though  the  President  of  the 
United  States,  in  the  prosecution  of  a  just  claim,  and  in  the  spirit  of  sus- 
taining the  rights  of  the  United  States,  had  been  induced  to  recommend 
the  measure  of  reprisals,  yet  that  a  confidence  was  entertained  in  both 
branches  of  Congress  that  there  would  be  a  compliance,  on  the  part  of  the 
French  government,  with  the  pledges  it  had  given,  and  so  forth.  In  that 
contingency,  the  expression  of  such  a  sentiment  by  Congress  could  not 
but  have  a  happy  effect.  In  the  other  contingency  supposed,  also,  it  is 
indispensable  that  some  such  measure  should  be  adopted.  Suppose  the 
bill  of  appropriation  to  be  rejected,  or  its  passage  to  be  suspended,  until 
the  Chambers  ascertain  whether  the  recommendation  by  the  president  is  to 
be  carried  out  by  the  passage  of  a  law  by  Congress,  a  resolution  like  this 
will  furnish  the  evidence  desired  of  the  disposition  of  Congress. 

If,  indeed,  upon  the  reception  of  the  president's  message  the  Chambers 
shall  have  refused  to  make  the  appropriation,  they  will  have  put  themselves 
in  the  wrong  by  not  attending  to  the  distribution  of  the  powers  of  this 
government,  and  informing  themselves  whether  those  branches  which  alone 
can  give  effect  to  the  president's  recommendation,  would  respond  to  it. 
But,  if  they  take  the  other  course  suggested,  that  of  suspending  action  on 
the  bill  until  they  ascertain  whether  the  legislative  department  of  the  gov- 
ernment coincides  with  the  executive  in  the  contingent  measure  recom- 
mended, they  will  then  find  that  the  president's  recommendation — the 
expression  of  the  opinion  of  one  high  in  authority,  indeed,  having  a  strong 
hold  on  the  affections  and  confidence  of  the  people,  wielding  the  executive 
power  of  the  nation,  but  still  an  inchoate  act,  having  no  effect  whatever 
without  the  legislative  action — had  not  been  responded  to  by  Congress,  and 
so  forth.  Thus  under  all  contingences  happening  on  the  other  side  of  the 
water,  and  adapted  to  any  one  of  those  contingences,  the  passage  of  this 
resolution  can  do  no  mischief  in  any  event,  but  is  eminently  calculated  to 
prevent  mischief,  and  to  secure  the  very  object  which  the  president  doubt- 
less proposed  to  accomplish  by  his  recommendation. 

I  will  not  now  consume  any  more  time  of  the  House  by  further  remarks, 
but  will  resume  my  seat  with  the  intimation  of  my  willingness  to  modify 


636  SPEECHES    OF   HENRY    CLAY. 

the  resolution  in  any  manner,  not  changing  its  result,  which  may  be  calcu- 
lated to  secure,  what  on  such  an  occasion  would  be  so  highly  desirable,  the 
unanimous  vote  of  the  Senate  in  its  favor.  I  believe  it,  however,  all-essen- 
tial that  there  should  be  a  declaration  that  Congress  do  not  think  it  ex- 
pedient, in  the  present  state  of  the  relations  between  the  United  States  and 
France,  to  pass  any  law  whatever  concerning  them. 

[After  brief  remarks  by  several  other  members,  the  resolution  was  slightly 
modified  and  passed  by  a  unanimous  vote.] 


ON  OUR  RELATIONS  WITH  THE  CHEROKEE 

INDIANS, 

IN  SENATE,  FEBRUARY  4,  1835. 

[Mr.  Clay's  love  of  justice  was,  perhaps,  never  better  exem- 
plified than  in  his  advocacy  of  the  rights  of  the  Cherokee  In- 
dians, as  set  forth  in  the  following  sueech.  One  can  not  but  ad- 
mire  such  a  disinterested  and  fearless  stand  for  the  right.  Mr. 
Clay  was  a  public  man,  and  always  a  candidate — not  self-pro- 
pounded, but  because  he  could  not  help  it — for  the  presidency. 
And  should  he  not  fear  to  offend  any  one  State,  whose  suffrages 
might  be  necessary  to  elect  him  ?  Better,  doubtless,  that  he 
should  so  impress  that  State  with  a  sense  of  his  unpurchas- 
able  uprightness,  of  his  purity,  and  of  his  unyielding  love  of 
justice.  If  it  should  be  discovered  that  he  might  be  bought,  he 
would  forfeit  respect.  But  such  a  contingency  was  never  a  mat- 
ter of  calculation  with  Mr.  Clay.  He  went  into  this  debate 
purely  from  the  impulses  of  his  heart — of  his  heart  toward  the 
poor  Indians,  and  of  his  heart  as  it  suffered  shame  for  the 
wrongs  which  had  been  inflicted  on  them.  Thus  were  the  senat- 
ors from  Georgia,  thus  was  the  State  of  Georgia,  which  they 
represented,  rebuked  by  every  word  of  this  speech.  The  wrongs 
done  to  the  Cherokee  Indians  by  that  State  could  not  be  vindi- 
cated by  any  art  or  special  pleading.  The  Constitution,  the 
most  solemn  treaties,  the  decree  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the 
United  States,  and  the  public  conscience  of  mankind,  were 
against  the  State  of  Georgia.  But  she  was  resolved  to  carry 
her  purpose  through,  and  she  found  one  man,  whose  ministerial 
office  was  essential  to  her,  and  whose  sense  of  justice  was  not 
like  that  of  Mr.  Clay — Andrew  Jackson.  Andrew  Jackson  was 
the  man,  who,  acting  as  President  of  the  United  States,  could 
dispense  wTith  a  decree  of  the  Supreme  Court ;  and  so  he  did  in 
this  very  case.  The  field  then  was  all  open  to  the  State  of 
Georgia,  and  she  drove  out  the  Cherokees,  and  divided  their 
lands  by  lottery  among  her  own  citizens.     It  was  General  Jack- 


638  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

son's  policy  to  remove  all  the  Indians  west  of  the  Mississippi ; 
and  he  succeeded.  The  poor  Indians  were  forced  to  turn  their 
backs  on  the  graves  of  their  fathers  ;  and  there  never  was  a  race 
of  men  who  had  stronger  affections  toward  their  dead.  And 
what  will  become  of  the  poor  Indians  next,  as  the  tides  of  the 
white  population  roll  on  to  the  west,  demanding  their  places  ? 
Will  the  Punic  faith  which  swept  them  from  their  ancient 
homes,  permit  them  to  stay  where  they  are  ?  Or  will  it  still 
push  them  forward,  till  the  waves  of  the  great  Pacific  shall  open 
to  them  a  burying-place,  which  will  never  be  left  behind  with 
regret,  "because  there  will  be  none  left  to  mourn  ?  The  last, 
probably,  will  have  perished  before  they  will  reach  that  bourne. 
What  judgments  of  Heaven  will  fall  on  the  nation  that  shall 
have  extinguished  such  a  race  of  men,  there  is  no  prophet  in- 
spired to  declare.  The  following  speech  is  full  of  melancholy 
admonitions  of  national  retribution  for  this  species  of  national 
injustice  ;  and  they  are  the  recorded  utterances  of  a  heart  that 
deplored  the  wrongs  done,  and  that  feared  for  the  wrong-doers.] 

Mr.  Clay  held  in  his  hands,  and  begged  leave  to  present  to  the  Senate, 
certain  resolutions  and  a  memorial,  to  the  Senate  and  House  of  Representa- 
tives of  the  United  States,  of  a  council  met  at  Running  Waters,  consisting 
of  a  portion  of  the  Cherokee  Indians.  The  Cherokees  have  a  country — 
if  indeed  it  can  he  any  longei  called  their  country — which  is  comprised 
within  the  limits  of  Georgia,  Alabama,  Tennessee,  and  North  Carolina. 
They  have  a  population  which  is  variously  estimated,  but  which,  according 
to  the  best  information  which  I  possess,  amounts  to  about  fifteen  thousand 
souls.  Of  this  population,  a  portion,  believed  to  be  much  the  greater  part, 
amounting,  as  is  estimated,  to  between  nine  and  ten  thousand  souls,  reside 
within  the  limits  of  the  State  of  Georgia.  The  Senate  was  well  aware  that 
for  several  years  past  it  had  been  the  policy  of  the  general  government  to 
transfer  the  Indians  to  the  west  of  the  Mississippi  river,  and  that  a  portion 
of  the  Cherokees  had  already  availed  themselves  of  this  policy  of  the  gov- 
ernment, and  emigrated  beyond  the  Mississippi.  Of  those  who  remain,  a 
portion — a  respectable  but  also  an  inconsiderable  portion — are  desirous  to 
emigrate  to  the  West,  and  a  much  larger  portion  desire  to  remain  on  their 
lands,  and  lay  their  bones  where  rest  those  of  their  ancestors.  The  papers 
which  I  now  present  emanate  from  the  minor  portion  of  the  Cherokees ; 
from  those  who  are  in  favor  of  emigration.  They  present  a  case  which  ap- 
peals strongly  to  the  sympathies  of  Congress.  They  say  that  it  is  impos- 
sible for  them  to  continue  to  live  under  laws  which  they  do  not  understand, 
passed  by  authority  in  which  they  have  no  share,  promulgated  in  language 
of  which  nothing  is  known  to  the  greater  portion  of  them,  and  establish- 
ing rules  for  their  government  entirely  unadapted  to  their  nature,  educa- 


ON    OUR   RELATIONS   WITH    THE    CHEROKEES.  G39 

tion,  and  habits.  They  say  that,  destruction  is  hanging  over  thern  if  they 
remain ;  that  their  right  of  self-government  being  destroyed,  though  they 
are  sensible  of  all  the  privations,  hardships,  and  sufferings  of  banishment 
from  their  native  homes,  they  prefer  exile,  with  liberty,  to  residence  in  their 
homes,  with  slavery.  They  implore,  the  intervention  of  the  general  gov- 
ernment, to  provide  for  their  removal  west  of  the  Mississippi,  and  to  estab- 
lish guaranties,  never  hereafter  to  be  violated,  of  the  possession  of  the 
lands  to  be  acquired  by  them  west  of  the  Mississippi,  and  of  the  perpetual 
right  of  self-government.  This  was  the  object  of  the  resolutions  and 
petition  which  he  was  about  to  offer  to  the  Senate. 

But  I  have  thought  that  this  occasion  was  one  which  called  upon  me  to 
express  the  opinions  and  sentiments  which  I  hold  in  relation  to  this  entire 
subject,  as  respects  not  only  the  emigrating  Indians,  but  those  also  who  are 
desirous  to  remain  at  home ;  in  short,  to  express,  in  concise  terms,  my 
views  of  the  relations  between  the  Indian  tribes  and  the  people  of  the 
United  States,  the  rights  of  both  parties,  and  the  duties  of  this  government 
in  regard  to  them. 

The  rights  of  the  Indians  were  to  be  ascertained,  in  the  first  place,  by 
the  solemn  stipulations  of  numerous  treaties  made  with  them  by  the  United 
States.  It  was  not  his  purpose  to  call  the  attention  of  the  Senate  to  all 
the  treaties  which  had  been  made  with  Indian  tribes  bearing  on  this  par- 
ticular topic ;  but  he  felt  constrained  to  ask  the  attention  of  the  Senate  to 
some  portions  of  those  treaties  which  have  been  made  with  the  Cherokees, 
and  to  the  memorable  treaty  of  Greenville,  which  had  terminated  the  war 
that  previously  thereto  for  many  years  raged  between  the  United  States 
and  the  north-western  Indian  tribes.  lie  found,  upon  consulting  the  col- 
lection of  Indian  treaties  in  his  hand,  that  within  the  last  half  century 
fourteen  different  treaties  had  been  concluded  with  the  Cherokees,  the  first 
of  which  bore  date  in  the  year  1775,  and  some  one  or  more  of  which  had 
been  concluded  under  every  administration  of  the  general  government,  from 
the  beginning  of  it  to  the  present  time,  except  the  present  administration, 
and  that  which  immediately  preceded  it.  The  treaty  of  Hopewell,  the  first 
in  the  series,  was  concluded  in  1775,  in  the  third  article  of  which  "the  said 
Indians,  for  themselves  and  their  respective  tribes  and  towns,  do  acknowl- 
edge all  the  Cherokees  to  be  under  the  protection  of  the  United  States  of 
America,  and  of  no  other  sovereign  whatsoever."  The  fifth  article  of  the 
same  treaty  provides,  that  "  if  any  citizen  of  the  United  States,  or  other 
person,  not  being  an  Indian,  shall  attempt  to  settle  on  any  of  the  lands 
westward  or  southward  of  the  said  boundary,  which  are  hereby  allotted  to 
the  Indians  for  their  hunting-grounds,  or,  having  already  settled,  and  will 
not  remove  from  the  same  within  six  months  after  the  ratification  of  this 
treaty,  such  person  shall  forfeit  the  protection  of  the  United  States,  and  the 
Indians  may  punish  him  or  not,  as  they  please  ;  provided,  nevertheless,  that 
this  article  shall  not  extend  to  the  people  settled  between  the  fork  of  French 
Broad  and  Holston  rivers,"  and  so  forth. 


640  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

The  next  treaty  in  the  series,  which  was  concluded  after  the  establish- 
ment of  the  government  of  the  United  States,  under  the  auspices  of  the 
father  of  his  country,  was  in  the  year  1791,  on  the  bank  of  the  Holston, 
and  contains  the  following  provision :    "  Article   1.    The  United   States 
solemnly  guaranty  to  the  Cherokee  nation  all  their  lands  not  hereby  ceded." 
This,  Mr.  Clay  said,  was  not  an  ordinary  assurance  of  protection,  and  so 
forth,  but  a  solemn  guaranty  of  the  rights  of  the  Cherokees  to  the  land  in 
question.     The  next  treaty  to  which  he  would  call  the  attention  of  the 
Senate  was  concluded  in  1794,  also  under  the  auspices  of  General  Wash- 
ington, and  declares  as  follows :  "  The  undersigned,  Henry  Knox,  Secretary 
for  the  Department  of  War,  being  authorized  thereto  by  the  President  of 
the  United  States,  in  behalf  of  the  said  United  States,  and  the  undersigned 
chiefs  and   warriors,  in  their  own  names,  and  in  behalf  of  the  whole 
Cherokee    nation,   are   desirous   of  re-establishing   peace   and    friendship 
between  the  said  parties  in  a  permanent  manner,  do  hereby  declare,  that 
the  said  treaty  of  Holston  is,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  in  full  force, 
and  binding  upon  the  said   parties,  as  well  in  respect  to  the  boundaries 
therein  mentioned  as  in  all  other  respects  whatever."     This  treaty,  it  is 
seen,  renews  the  solemn  guaranty  contained  in  the  preceding  treaty,  and 
declares  it  to  be  binding  and  obligatory  upon  the  parties  in  all  respects 
whatever.     Again,  in  another  treaty,  concluded  in  1798,  under  the  second 
chief  magistrate  of  the  United  States,  we  find  the  following  stipulations : 
"Article  2.  The  treaties  subsisting  between  the  present  contracting  parties 
are  acknowledged  to  be  of  full  and  operating  force;  together  with  the 
construction  and  usage  under  their  respective  articles,  and  so  to  continue." 
"Article  3.  The  limits  and  boundaries  of  the  Cherokee  nation,  as  stipu- 
lated and  marked  by  the  existing  treaties  between  the  parties,  shall  be  and 
remain  the  same,  where  not  altered  by  the  present  treaty." 

There  were  other  provisions,  in  other  treaties,  to  which,  if  he  did  not 
intend  to  take  up  as  little  time  as  possible  of  the  Senate,  he  might  ad- 
vantageously call  their  attention.  He  would,  however,  pass  on  to  one  of 
the  last  treaties  with  the  Cherokees,  which  was  concluded  in  the  year 
1817.  That  treaty  recognized  the  difference  existing  between  the  two 
portions  of  the  Cherokees,  one  of  which  was  desirous  to  remain  at  home 
and  prosecute  the  good  work  of  civilization,  in  which  they  had  made  some 
progress,  and  the  other  portion  was  desirous  to  go  beyond  the  Mississippi. 
In  that  treaty,  the  fifth  article,  after  several  other  stipulations,  concludes  as 
follows :  "And  it  is  further  stipulated,  that  the  treaties  heretofore  made  be- 
tween the  Cherokee  nation  and  the  United  States  are  to  continue  in  full 
force  with  both  parts  of  the  nation,  and  both  parts  thereof  entitled  to  all  the 
privileges  and  immunities  which  the  old  nation  enjoyed  under  the  aforesaid 
treaties ;  the  United  States  reserving  the  right  of  establishing  factories,  a 
military  post,  and  roads,  within  the  boundaries  above  defined."  And  to 
this  treaty,  thus  emphatically  renewing  the  recognition  of  the  rights  of 
the  Indians,  is  signed  the  name,  as  one  of  the  commissioners  of  the  United 


ON    OUR   RELATIONS    WITH    THE    CHEROKEES.  641 

States  who  negotiated  it,  of  the  present  chief  magistrate  of  the  United 
States.    .  % 

These  were  the  stipulations  in  treaties  with  the  Cherokee  nation,  to  which 
Mr.  Clay  said,  he  thought  proper  to  call  the  attention  of  the  Senate.  He 
would  now  turn  to  the  treaty  of  Greenville,  concluded  about  forty  years 
ago,  recognizing  some  general  principles  applicable  to  this  subject.  Mr. 
Clay  then  quoted  the  fifth  article  of  that  treaty,  as  follows  :  "  To  prevent 
any  misunderstanding  about  the  Indian  lands  relinquished  by  the  Uiited 
States  in  the  fourth  article,  it  is  now  explicitly  declared,  that  the  meaning 
of  that  relinquishment  is  this  :  the  Indian  tribes  who  have  a  right  to  those 
lands  are  quietly  to  enjoy  them,  hunting,  planting,  or  dwelling  thereon  so 
long  as  they  please,  without  any  molestation  from  the  United  States ;  but 
when  those  tribes,  or  any  of  them,  shall  be  disposed  to  sell  their  lands,  or 
any  part  of  them,  they  are  to  be  sold  only  to  the  United  States ;  and  until 
such  sale  the  United  States  will  protect  all  the  said  Indian  tribes  in  the 
quiet  enjoyment  of  their  lands  against  all  citizens  of  the  United  States,  and 
against  all  other  white  persons  who  intrude  upon  the  same.  And  the  said 
Indian  tribes  again  acknowledge  themselves  to  be  under  the  protection  of 
the  said  United  States,  and  no  other  power  whatever." 

Such,  sir,  are  the  rights  of  the  Indian  tribes.  And  what  are  those 
rights  ?  They  are,  that  the  Indians  shall  live  under  their  own  customs 
and  laws;  that  they  shall  live  upon  their  own  lands,  hunting,  planting, 
and  dwelling  thereon  so  long  as  they  please,  without  interruption  or  mo- 
lestation of  any  sort  from  the  white  people  of  the  United  States,  acknowl- 
edging themselves  under  the  protection  of  the  United  States,  and  of  no 
other  power  whatever ;  that  when  they  no  longer  wish  to  keep  the  lands, 
they  shall  sell  them  only  to  the  United  States,  whose  government  thus  se- 
cures to  itself  the  pre-emptive  right  of  purchase  in  them.  These  rights,  so 
secured  by  successive  treaties  and  guaranties,  have  also  been  recognized 
on  several  occasions,  by  the  highest  judicial  tribunals.  Mr.  Clay  here 
quoted,  from  an  opinion  of  the  Supreme  Court,  a  passage,  declaring  that 
the  Indians  are  acknowledged  to  have  an  unquestionable  and  heretofore 
unquestioned  right  to  their  land,  until  it  shall  be  extinguished  by  voluntary 
cession  to  this  government. 

But  it  is  not  at  home  alone  that  the  rights  of  the  Indians  within  the 
limits  of  the  Uuited  States  have  been  recognized.  Not  only  has  the  ex- 
ecutive, the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  and  the  Supreme  Court,  recog- 
nized these  rights,  but  in  one  of  the  most  important  epochs  of  this  govern- 
ment, and  on  one  of  the  most  solemn  occasions  in  our  intercourse  with 
foreign  powers,  these  rights  of  the  Indian  tribes  have  been  acknowledged. 
You,  sir  (addressing  the  President  of  the  Senate),  will  understand  me  at 
once  to  refer  to  the  negotiation  between  the  government  of  Great  Britain 
and  that  of  the  United  States,  which  had  for  its  object  the  termination  of 
the  late  war  between  the  two  countries.  Sir,  it  must  be  within  your  recol- 
lection, and  that  of  every  member  of  the  Senate,  that  the  hinge  upon  which 

41 


642  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

that  negotiation  turned,  and  the  ground  upon  which  it  was  for  a  long 
time  apprehended  that  the  conference  between  the  commissioners  would 
terminate  in  a  rupture  of  the  negotiation  between  the  two  countries,  was 
the  claim  brought  forward,  on  that  memorable  occasion,  by  Great  Britain, 
in  behalf  of  the  Indians  within  the  limits  of  the  United  States.  It  will  be 
recollected  that  she  advanced,  as  a  principle  from  which  she  could  not  re- 
cede, as  a  sine  qua  non,  again  and  again,  during  the  progress  of  the 
negotiation,  that  the  Indians,  as  her  allies,  should  be  included  in  the 
treaty  of  peace  which  the  negotiators  were  about  forming;  that  they 
should  have  a  permanent  boundary  assigned  them,  and  that  neither 
Great  Britain  nor  the  United  States  should  be  at  liberty  to  purchase  their 
lands. 

Such  were  the  pretensions  urged  on  that  occasion,  which  the  commis- 
sioners of  the  United  States  had  felt  it  to  be  their  imperative  duty  to 
resist.     To  establish  as  the  boundary  the  line  of  the  treaty  of  Greenville, 
as  proposed,  which  would  have  excluded  from  the  benefit  of  American 
laws  and  privileges  a  population  of  not  less  than  a  hundred  thousand  of 
the  inhabitants  of  Ohio,  American  citizens,  entitled  to  the  protection  of 
the  government,  was  a  proposition  which  the  American  negotiators  could 
not  for  a  moment  entertain  ;  they  would  not  even  refer  it  to  their  govern- 
ment, though  assured  that  it  would  there  meet  with  the  same  unanimous 
rejection  that  it  did  from  them.     But  it  became  a  matter  of  some  import- 
ance that  a  satisfactory  assurance   should  be  given  to  Great  Britain,  that 
the  war,  which  we  were  about  to  bring  to  a  conclusion  with  her,  should 
close  also  with  her  allies ;  and  what  was  that  assurance  ?     Mr.  Clay  said 
he  would  not  trouble  the  Senate  with  tracing  the  whole  account  of  that 
negotiation,  but  he  begged  leave  to  call  their  attention  to  one  of  the  pas- 
sages of  it.     You  will  find  on  examining  the  history  of  the  negotiation, 
that  the  demand  brought  forward  by  the  British  government  through  their 
minister,  on  this  occasion,  was  the  subject  of  several  argumentative  papers. 
Toward  the  close  of  this  correspondence,  reviewing  the  course  pursued 
toward  the  aborigines  by  the  several  European  powers  which  had  planted 
colonies  in  America,  comparing  it  with  that  of  the  United  States,  and  con- 
trasting the  lenity,  kindness,  and  forbearance  of  the  United  States,  with 
the  rigor  and  severity  of  other  powers,  the  American  negotiators  expressed 
themselves  as  follows : 

"  From  the  rigor  of  this  system,  however,  as  practiced  by  Great  Britain, 
and  all  the  other  European  powers  in  America,  the  humane  and  liberal 
policy  of  the  United  States  has  voluntarily  relaxed.  A  celebrated  writer 
on  the  law  of  nations,  to  whose  authority  British  jurists  have  taken  particu- 
lar satisfaction  in  appealing,  after  stating,  in  the  most  explicit  manner,  the 
legitimacy  of  colonial  settlements  in  America,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  rights 
of  uncivilized  Indian  tribes,  has  taken  occasion  to  praise  the  first  settlers  of 
New  England,  and  of  the  founder  of  Pennsylvania,  in  having  purchased  of 
Indians  the  land  they  resolved  to  cultivate,  notwithstanding  their  being 


ON   OUR   RELATIONS   WITH   THE   CHEROKEES.  643 

furnished  with  a  charter  from  their  sovereign.  It  is  this  example  which 
the  United  States,  since  they  became  by  their  independence  the  sovereigns 
of  the  territory,  have  adopted  and  organized  into  a  political  system.  Under 
that  system  the  Indians  residing  in  the  United  States  are  so  far  independ- 
ent, that  they  live  under  their  own  customs,  and  not  under  the  laws  of  the 
United  States ;  that  their  rights  upon  the  lands  where  they  inhabit  or  hunt 
are  secured  to  them  by  boundaries  defined  in  amicable  treaties  between  the 
United  States  and  themselves ;  and  that  whenever  those  boundaries  are 
varied,  it  is  also  by  amicable  and  voluntary  treaties,  by  which  they  receive 
from  the  United  States  ample  compensation  for  every  right  they  have  to 
the  lands  ceded  by  them,"  and  so  forth. 

The  correspondence  was  further  continued  ;  and,  finally,  the  commission- 
ers on  the  part  of  Great  Britain  proposed  an  article  to  which  the  American 
commissioners  assented,  the  basis  of  which  is,  a  declaration  of  what  is  the 
state  of  the  law  between  the  Indian  tribes  and  the  people  of  the  United 
States.  They  then  proposed  a  further  article  which  declared  that  the 
United  States  should  endeavor  to  restore  peace  to  the  Indians  who  had 
acted  on  the  side  of  Great  Britain,  together  with  all  the  rights,  possessions, 
privileges,  and  immunities  which  they  possessed  prior  to  the  year  1811, 
that  is,  antecedently  to  the  war  between  England  and  the  United  States  ; 
in  consideration  that  Great  Britain  would  terminate  the  war,  so  far  as  res- 
pected the  Indians  who  had  been  allies  of  the  United  States,  and  restore  to 
them  all  the  rights  privileges,  possessions,  and  immunities  which  these 
also  had  enjoyed  previously  to  the  same  period.  Mr.  President,  I  here 
state  my  solemn  belief,  that  if  the  American  commissioners  had  not  de- 
clared the  laws  between  the  Indians  and  the  people  of  this  country,  and 
the  rights  of  the  Indians  to  be  such  as  they  are  stated  to  be  in  the  extracts 
I  have  read  to  the  Senate ;  if  they  had  then  stated  that  any  one  State  of 
this  Union  who  happened  to  have  Indians  residing  wdthin  its  limits,  pos- 
sessed the  riidit  of  extending  over  them  the  laws  of  such  State,  and  of 
taking  their  lands,  when  and  how  it  pleased,  that  the  effect  would  have 
been  a  prolongation  of  the  war.  I  again  declare  my  most  solemn  belief 
that  Great  Britain,  who  assented  with  great  reluctance  to  this  mutual  stip- 
ulation with  respect  to  the  Indians,  never  would  have  done  it  at  all,  but 
under  a  conviction  of  the  correspondence  of  those  principles  of  Indian  in- 
ternational law  (if  I  may  use  such  a  phrase)  with  those  which  the  United 
States  government  had  respected  ever  since  the  period  of  our  independ- 
ence. 

Sir,  if  I  am  right  in  this,  let  me  ask  whether  in  adopting  the  new  code 
which  now  prevails,  and  by  which  the  rights  of  the  Indians  have  been 
trampled  on,  and  the  most  solemn  obligations  of  treaties  have  been  disre- 
garded, we  are  not  chargeable  with  having  induced  that  power  to  conclude 
a  peace  with  us  by  suggestions  utterly  unfounded  and  erroneous  ? 

Most  of  the  treaties  between  the  Cherokee  nation  of  Indians  and  the 
United  States  have  been  submitted  to  the  Senate  for  ratification,  and  the 


644  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

Senate  have  acted  upon  them  in  conformity  with  their  constitutional  power. 
Besides  the  action  of  the  Senate,  as  a  legislative  body,  in  the  enactment  of 
laws  in  conformity  with  their  stipulations,  regulating  the  intercourse  of  our 
citizens  with  that  nation,  it  has  acted  in  its  separate  character,  and  con- 
firmed the  treaties  themselves  by  the  constitutional  majority  of  two  thirds 
of  its  members.  Thus  have  those  treaties  been  sanctioned  by  the  govern- 
ment of  the  United  States,  and  by  every  branch  of  that  government ;  by 
the  Senate,  the  executive,  and  the  Supreme  Court ;  both  at  home  and 
abroad.  But  not  only  have  the  rights  of  the  Cherokees  received  all  these 
recognitions ;  they  have  been,  by  implication,  recognized  by  the  State  of 
Georgia  itself,  in  the  act  of  1802,  in  which  she  stipulated  that  the  govern- 
ment of  the  United  States,  and  not  the  State  of  Georgia,  should  extinguish 
the  Indian  title  to  land  within  her  limits  ;  and  the  general  government  has 
been,  from  time  to  time,  urged  by  Georgia  to  comply  with  its  engagement 
from  that  period  until  the  adoption  of  the  late  new  policy  upon  this  subject. 

Having  thus,  Mr  President,  stated,  as  I  hope  with  clearness,  the  rights  of 
Indian  tribes,  as  recognized  by  the  most  solemn  acts  that  can  be  entered 
into  by  any  government,  let  me,  in  the  next  place,  inquire  into  the  nature 
of  the  injuries  which  have  been  inflicted  upon  them;  in  other  words,  into 
the  present  condition  of  these  Cherokees,  to  whom  protection  had  been 
assured  as  well  by  solemn  treaties  as  by  the  laws  and  guaranties  of  the 
United  States  government. 

And  here  let  me  be  permitted  to  say,  that  I  go  into  this  subject  with 
feelings  which  no  language  at  my  command  will  enable  me  adequately  to 
express.  I  assure  the  Senate,  and  in  an  especial  manner  do  I  assure  the 
honorable  senators  from  Georgia,  that  my  wish  and  purpose  are  any  other 
than  to  excite  the  slightest  possible  irritation  on  the  part  of  any  human 
being.  Far  from  it.  I  am  actuated  only  by  feelings  of  grief,  feelings  of 
sorrow,  and  of  profound  regret,  irresistibly  called  forth  by  a  contemplation 
of  the  miserable  condition  to  which  these  unfortunate  people  have  been 
reduced  by  acts  of  legislation  proceeding  from  one  of  the  States  of  this 
confederacy.  I  again  assure  the  honorable  senators  from  Georgia,  that, 
if  it  has  become  my  painful  duty  to  comment  upon  some  of  these  acts,  I  do 
it  not  with  any  desire  to  place  them,  or  the  State  they  represent,  in  an  in- 
vidious position  ;  but  because  Georgia  was,  I  believe,  the  first  in  the  career, 
the  object  of  which  seems  to  be  the  utter  annihilation  of  every  Indian  right, 
and  because  she  has  certainly,  in  the  promotion  of  it,  far  outstripped  every 
other  State  in  the  Union. 

I  have  not  before  me  the  various  acts  of  the  State  in  reference  to  the 
Indians  within  her  bounds ;  and  it  is  possible  I  may  be  under  some  mis- 
take in  reference  to  them  ;  and  if  I  am,  no  one  will  correct  the  error  more 
readily,  or  with  greater  pleasure. 

If,  however,  I  had  all  those  laws  in  my  hands,  I  should  not  now  attempt 
to  read  them.  Instead  of  this,  it  will  be  sufficient  for  me  to  state  the 
effects  which  have  been  produced  by  them  upon  the  condition  of  the  Cher- 


ON    OUR   RELATIONS  WITH   THE   CHEROKEES.  645 

okee  Indians  residing  in  that  State.  And  here  follows  a  list  of  what  has 
been  done  by  her  Legislature.  Her  first  act  was  to  abolish  the  government 
of  these  Cherokees.  No  human  community  can  exist  without  a  govern- 
ment of  some  kind  ;  and  the  Cherokees,  imitating  our  example,  and  hav- 
ing learned  from  us  something  of  the  principles  of  a  free  Constitution, 
established  for  themselves  a  government  somewhat  resembling  our  own. 
It  is  quite  immaterial  to  us  what  its  form  was.  They  always  had  had  some 
government  among  them ;  and  we  guarantied  to  them  the  right  of  living 
under  their  own  laws  and  customs,  unmolested  by  any  one  ;  insomuch  that 
our  own  citizens  were  outlawed  should  they  presume  to  interfere  with  them. 
What  particular  regulations  they  adopted,  in  the  management  of  their 
humble  and  limited  concerns,  is  a  matter  with  which  we  have  no  concern. 
However,  the  very  first  act  of  the  Georgia  Legislature  was,  to  abolish  all 
government  of  every  sort  among  these  people,  and  to  extend  the  laws  and 
government  of  the  State  of  Georgia  over  them.  The  next  step  was  to 
divide  their  territory  into  counties  ;  the  next,  to  survey  the  Cherokee  land  ; 
and  the  last,  to  distribute  this  laud  among  the  citizens  of  Georgia  by  lot- 
tery, giving  to  every  head  of  a  family  one  ticket,  and  the  prize  in  land 
that  should  be  drawn  against  it.  To  be  sure  there  were  many  reservations 
for  the  heads  of  Indian  families ;  and  of  how  much  did  gentlemen  sup- 
pose ?  of  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres  only,  and  this  to  include  their  im- 
provements. But  even  to  this  limited  possession  the  poor  Indian  was  to 
have  no  fee-simple  title  ;  he  was  to  hold  as  a  mere  occupant,  at  the  will  of 
the  State  of  Georgia,  for  just  as  long  or  as  short  a  time  as  she  might  think 
proper.  The  laws  at  the  same  time  gave  him  no  one  political  right,  what- 
ever. He  could  not  become  a  member  of  the  State  Legislature,  nor  could 
he  hold  any  office  under  State  authority,  nor  could  he  vote  as  an  elector. 
He  possessed  not  one  single  right  of  a  freeman  :  no ;  not  even  the  poor 
privilege  of  testifying  to  his  wrongs  in  the  character  of  a  witness  in  the 
courts  of  Georgia,  or  in  any  matter  of  controversy  whatsoever. 

These,  Mr.  President,  are  the  acts  of  the  Legislature  of  the  State  of 
Georgia,  in  relation  to  the  Indians.  They  were  not  all  passed  at  one  ses- 
sion ;  they  were  enacted,  time  after  time,  as  the  State  advanced  further  and 
further  in  her  steps  to  the  acquisition  of  the  Indian  country,  and  the  de- 
struction and  annihilation  of  all  Indian  rights  ;  until,  by  a  recent  act  of  the 
same  body,  the  courts  of  the  State  itself  are  occluded  against  the  Indian 
sufferer,  aud  he  is  actually  denied  an  appeal  even  to  foreign  tribunals,  in 
the  erection  and  in  the  laws  of  which  he  had  no  voice,  there  to  complain 
of  his  wrongs.  If  he  enters  the  hall  of  Georgia's  justice,  it  is  upon  a  sur- 
render at  the  threshold  of  all  his  rights.  The  history  of  this  last  law,  to 
which  I  have  alluded,  is  this  :  when  the  previous  law  of  the  State  dividing 
the  Indian  lands  by  lottery  was  passed,  some  Indians  made  an  appeal  to 
one  of  the  judges  of  the  State,  and  applied  for  an  injunction  against  the 
proceeding ;  and  such  was  the  undeniable  justice  of  their  plea,  that  the 
judge  found  himself  unable  to  refuse  it,  and  he  granted  the  injunction 


646  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

sought.  It  was  that  injunction  which  led  to  the  passage  of  this  act ;  to 
some  of  the  provisions  of  which  I  now  invite  the  attention  of  the  Senate. 
And  first  to  the  title  of  the  act  ;  "  a  hill  to  amend  an  act  entitled  an  act 
more  effectually  to  provide  for  the  government  and  protection  of  the  Cher- 
okee Indians  residing  within  the  limits  of  Georgia,  and  to  prescrihe  the 
hounds  of  tlu-ir  occupant  claims  ;  and  also  to  authorize  grants  to  issue  for 
lots  drawn  in  the  late  land  and  gold  lotteries" — ah,  sir,  it  was  the  pursuit 
of  gold  which  led  the  Spanish  invader  to  desolate  the  fair  fields  of  Mexico 
and  Peru — ''and  to  provide  for  the  appointment  of  an  agent  to  carry  cer- 
tain parts  thereof  into  execution  ;  and  to  fix  the  salary  of  such  agent,  and 
to  punish  those  persons  who  may  deter  Indians  from  enrolling  for  emigra- 
tion, passed  the  20th  of  December,  1833."  Well,  sir,  this  bill  goes  on  to 
provide,  "  that  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  agent  or  agents  appoint-  d  by  his 
excellency  the  governor,  under  the  authority  of  this  or  the  act  of  which 
it  is  amendatory,  to  report  to  him  the  number,  district,  and  section  of  all 
lots  of  land  subject  to  be  granted  by  the  provisions  of  said  act,  which  he 
may  be  required  to  do  by  the  drawer,  or  his  agent,  or  the  person  claiming 
the  same;  and  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  his  excellency  the  governor,  upon 
the  application  of  the  drawer  of  any  of  the  aforesaid  lots,  his  or  her  special 
agents,  or  the  person  to  whom  the  drawer  may  have  bond  fide  conveyed 
the  same,  his  agent  or  assigns,  to  issue  a  grant  therefor;  and  it  shall  be 
the  duty  of  the  said  agent  or  agents,  upon  the  pro  luction  of  the  grant  so 
issued  as  aforesaid  by  the  grantor,  his  or  her  agent,  or  the  person,  or  his 
or  her  agent  to  whom  said  land  bo  granted  as  aforesaid  may  have  been 
bond  fide  conveyed,  to  deliver  possession  of  said  granted  lot  to  the  said 
grantee,  or  person  entitled  to  the  |  ss  ssion  of  the  same  under  the  provis- 
ions of  this  act,  or  the  act  of  which  this  is  amendatory,  and  his  excellency 
the  o-overnor  is  hereby  authorized,  upon  satisfactory  evidence  that  the  said 
agent  is  impeded  or  resisted  in  delivering  such  possession,  by  a  force  which 
he  can  not  overcome,  to  order  out  a  sufficient  force  to  carry  the  power  of 
said  agent  or  agents  fully  into  effect,  and  to  pay  the  expenses  of  the  same 
out  of  the  contingent  fund ;  provided  nothing  in  this  act  shall  be  so  con- 
strued as  to  require  the  interference  of  the  said  agent  between  two  or  more 
individuals  claiming  possession,  by  virtue  of  titles  derived  from  a  grant 
from  the  State  to  any  lot." 

Thus,  after  the  State  of  Georgia  had  distributed  the  lands  of  the  Indi- 
ans by  lottery,  and  the  drawers  of  prizes  were  authorized  to  receive  grants 
of  the  land  drawn,  and  with  these  grants  in  their  hand  were  authorized  to 
demand  of  the  agent  of  the  State,  appointed  for  the  purpose,  to  be  put  in 
possession  of  the  soil  thus  obtained ;  and  if  any  resistance  to  their  entry 
should  be  made — and  who  was  to  make  it  but  a  poor  Indian? — the  governor 
is  empowered  to  turn  out  the  military  force  of  the  State,  and  enable  the 
agent  to  take  possession  by  force,  without  trial,  without  judgment,  and 
without  investigation. 

But,  should  there  be  two  claimants  of  the  prize,  should  two  of  the  ticket- 


ON    OUR    RELATIONS    WITH    THE    CHEROKEE3.  647 

holders  dispute  their  claim  to  the  same  lot,  then  no  military  force  was  to 
be  used.  It  was  only  when  the  resistance  was  by  an  Indian — it  was  only 
when  Indian  rights  should  come  into  collision  with  the  alleged  rights  of 
the  State  of  Georgia — that  the  strong  hand  of  military  power  wa~  instantly 
to  interpose. 

The  next  section  of  the  act  is  in  these  words :  "  and  be  it  further  enacted 
by  the  authority  aforesaid,  that  if  any  person  dispossessed  of  a  lot  of  land 
under  this  act,  or  the  act  of  which  it  is  amendatory,  shall  go  before  a 
justice  of  the  peace  or  of  the  inferior  court,  and  make  affidavit  that  be  or 
she  was  not  liable  to  be  dispossessed  under  or  by  any  of  the  provisions  of 
this  or  the  aforesaid  act,  and  file  said  affidavit  in  the  clerk's  office  of  the 
Superior  Court  of  the  county  in  which  said  land  shall  lie,  such  person  upon 
giving  bond  and  security  in  the  clerk's  office  for  the  costs  to  accrue  on  the 
trial,  shall  be  permitted  within  ten  days  from  such  dispossessing  to  enter 
an  appeal  to  said  Superior  Cou.t  and  at  said  court  the  judge  shall  cause  an 
issue  to  be  made  up  between  the  appellant  and  the  person  to  whom  pos- 

don  of  said  land  was  delivered  by  either  of  said  agents,  which  said  issue 
shall  be  in  the  following  form." 

[Mr.  Cuthbert,  of  Georgia,  here  interposed :  and  having  obtained  Mr.  Clay's 
consent  to  explain,  stated  that  he  had  unfortunately  not  been  in  the  Senate 
when  the  honorable  senator  commenced  his  speech ;  but  had  learned  that  it  was 
in  support  of  a  memorial  from  certain  Cherokee  Indians  in  the  State  of  Georgia, 
who  desired  to  emigrate.  He  must  be  permitted  to  say,  that  the  current  of  the 
honorable  senator's  remarks  did  not  suit  remarkably  well  the  subject  of  such  a 
memorial.  A  memorial  of  a  different  kind  had  been  presented,  and  which  the 
committee  on  Indian  affairs  had  before  it,  to  which  the  senator's  remarks  would 
better  apply.  The  present  discussion  was  wholly  unexpected,  and  it  seemed  to 
him  not  in  consistency  with  the  object  of  the  memorial  he  had  presented.] 

Mr.  Clay  replied,  that  he  was  truly  sorry  the  honorable  gentleman  had 
been  absent  when  he  commenced  speaking.  He  had  delayed  presenting 
the  memorial,  because  he  observed  that  neither  of  the  senators  from 
Georgia  was  in  his  seat,  until  the  hour  when  they  might  be  expected  to  be 
present,  and  when  one  of  them  (Mr.  King),  had  actually  taken  his  seat. 
If  the  honorable  senator  had  been  present  he  would  have  heard  Mr.  Clay 
say  that  he  thought  the  presentation  of  the  memorial  a  fit  occasion  to  ex- 
press his  sentiments,  not  only  touching  the  rights  of  these  individual  peti- 
tioners, but  on  the  rights  of  all  the  Indian  tribes,  and  their  relations  to  this 
government.  And  if  he  would  have  but  a  little  patience  he  would  find 
that  it  was  Mr.  Clay's  intention  to  present  propositions  which  went  to  em- 
brace both  resolutions. 

Mr.  Clay  now  resumed  the  course  of  his  speech.  And  here,  Mr.  Presi- 
dent, let  me  pause,  and  invite  the  attention  of  the  Senate  to  the  provision 
in  the  act  of  Georgia  which  I  was  reading  (the  substance  of  which  Mr. 
Clay  here  repeated),  that  is,  that  he  may  have  the  privilege  of  an  appeal 
to  a  tribunal  of  justice  by  forms  and  by  a  bond  with  the  nature  and  force 


648  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

of  which  he  is  unacquainted  ;  and  that  then  he  may  have — what  beside  ? 
I  invoke  the  attention  of  the  Senate  to  this  part  of  the  law.  What,  I  ask, 
does  it  secure  to  the  Indian  ?  His  rights  ?  the  rights  recognized  by 
treaties  ?  the  rights  guarantied  to  him  by  the  most  solemn  acts  which 
human  governments  can  perform  ?  No.  It  allows  him  to  come  into  the 
courts  of  the  State,  and  there  to  enjoy  the  benefit  of  the  summary  pro- 
ceeding called  in  the  act  "  an  appeal,"  but  which  can  never  be  continued 
beyond  a  second  term  ;  and  when  he  comes  there,  what  then  ?  He  shall 
be  permitted  to  come  into  court  and  enter  an  appeal,  which  shall  he  in  the 
following  form  : 

"  A.  B.,  who  was  dispossessed  of  a  lot  of  land  by  an  agent  of  the  State  of 
Georgia,  comes  into  court,  and,  admitting  the  right  of  the  State  of  Georgia  to 
pass  the  law  under  which  agent  acted,  avers  that  he  was  not  liable  to  be  dispos- 
sessed of  said  land,  by  or  under  any  one  of  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  of  Georgia,  passed  the  20th  of  December,  1833,  'more  effectually 
to  provide  for  the  protection  of  the  Cherokee  Indians  residing  within  the  limits 
of  Georgia,  and  to  prescribe  the  bounds  of  their  occupant  claims,  and  also  to 
authorize  grants  to  issue  for  lots  drawn  in  the  land  and  gold  lotteries  in  certain 
cases,  and  to  provide  for  the  appointment  of  an  agent  to  carry  certain  parts 
thereof  into  execution,  and  fix  the  salary  of  such  agent,  and  to  punish  those 
persons  who  may  deter  Indians  from  enrolling  for  emigration,'  or  the  act  amend- 
atory thereof,  passed  at  the  session  of  the  Legislature  of  1834  :  'in  which  issue 
the  person  to  whom  possession  of  said  land  was  delivered  shall  join ;  and  which 
issue  shall  constitute  the  entire  pleading's  between  the  parties ;  nor  shall  the 
court  allow  any  matter  other  than  is  contained  in  said  issue  to  be  placed  upon 
the  record  or  files  of  said  court ;  and  said  cause  shall  be  tried  at  the  first  term 
of  the  court,  unless  good  cause  shall  be  shown  for  a  continuance,  ar.d  the  same 
party  shall  not  be  permitted  to  continue  said  cause  more  than  once,  except  for 
unavoidable  providential  cause ;  nor  shall  said  court  at  the  instance  of  either 
party  pass  any  order  or  grant  any  injunction  to  stay  said  cause,  nor  permit  to 
be  engrafted  on  said  cause  any  other  proceedings,  whatever.'  " 

At  the  same  time  we  find,  by  another  enactment,  the  judges  of  the 
courts  of  Georgia  are  restrained  from  granting  injunctions,  so  that  the  only 
form  in  which  the  Indian  can  come  before  them  is  in  the  form  of  an  ap- 
peal ;  and  in  this,  the  very  first  step  is  an  absolute  renunciation  of  the 
rights  he  holds  by  treaty,  and  the  unqualified  admission  of  the  rights  of  his 
antagonist,  as  conferred  by  the  laws  of  Georgia ;  and  the  court  is  expressly 
prohibited  from  putting  any  thing  else  upon  the  record.  Why  ?  do  we  not 
all  know  the  reason  ?  If  the  poor  Indian  was  allowed  to  put  in  a  plea 
6tatiiui;  his  rights,  and  the  court  should  then  decide  against  him,  the  cause 
would  go  upon  an  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court ;  the  decision  could  he  re- 
examined, could  be  annulled,  and  the  authority  of  treaties  vindicated. 
But,  to  prevent  this,  to  make  it  impossible,  he  is  compelled,  on  entering 
the  court,  to  renounce  his  Indian  rights,  and  the  court  is  forbidden  to  put 
any  thing  on  record  which  can  bring  up  a  decision  upon  them. 

Mr.  President,  I  have  already  stated  that,  in  the  observations  I  have 


ON   OUR   RELATION'S   "WITH    THE   CHEROKEES.  649 

made,  I  am  actuated  by  no  other  feelings  than  such  as  ought  to  be  in  the 
breast  of  every  honest  man,  the  feelings  of  common  justice.  I  would  say 
nothing,  I  would  whisper  nothing,  I  would  insinuate  nothing,  I  would  think 
nothing,  which  can,  in  the  remotest  degree,  cause  irritation  in  the  mind  of 
any  one,  of  any  senator  here,  of  any  State  in  this  Union ;  I  have  too  much 
respect  for  every  member  of  the  confederacy.  I  feel  nothing  but  grief  for 
the  wretched  condition  of  these  most  unfortunate  people,  and  every  emotion 
of  my  bosom  dissuades  me  from  the  use  of  epithets  that  might  raise  emo- 
tions which  should  draw  the  attention  of  the  Senate  from  the  justice  of 
their  claims.  I  forbear  to  apply  to  this  law  any  epithet  of  any  kind.  Sir, 
no  epithet  is  needed.  The  features  of  the  law  itself;  its  warrant  for  the 
interposition  of  military  power,  when  no  trial  and  no  judgment  has  been 
allowed  ;  its  denial  of  any  appeal,  unless  the  unhappy  Indian  shall  first  re- 
nounce his  own  rights,  and  admit  the  rights  of  his  opponent ;  features  such 
as  these  are  enough  to  show  wdiat  the  true  character  of  the  act  is,  and  su- 
persede the  necessity  of  all  epithets,  were  I  even  capable  of  applying  any. 

The  Senate  will  thus  perceive  that  the  whole  power  of  the  State  of 
Georgia,  military  as  well  as  civil,  has  been  made  to  bear  upon  these  In- 
dians, without  their  having  any  voice  in  forming,  judging  ujion,  or  execut- 
ing the  laws  under  which  he  is  placed,  and  without  even  the  poor  privilege 
of  establishing  the  injury  he  may  have  suffered,  by  Indian  evidence ;  nay, 
worse  still,  not  even  by  the  evidence  of  a  white  man  !  Because  the  renun- 
ciation of  his  rights  precludes  all  evidence,  white  or  black,  civilized  or 
savage.  There  then  he  lies,  with  his  property,  his  rights,  and  every  priv- 
ilege which  makes  human  existence  desirable,  at  the  mere  mercy  of  the 
State  of  Georgia;  a  State,  in  whose  government  or  laws  he  has  no  voice. 
Sir,  it  is  impossible  for  the  most  active  imagination  to  conceive  a  condition 
of  human  society  more  perfectly  wretched.  Shall  I  be  told  that  the  con- 
dition of  the  African  slave  is  worse  ?  No,  sir  ;  no,  sir.  It  is  not  worse. 
The  interest  of  the  master  makes  it  at  once  his  duty  and  his  inclination,  to 
provide  fur  the  comfort  and  the  health  of  his  slave  ;  for  without  these,  he 
would  be  unprofitable.  Both  pride  and  interest  render  the  master  prompt 
in  vindicating  the  rights  of  his  slave,  and  protecting  him  from  the  oppres- 
sion  of  others :  and  the  laws  secure  to  him  the  amplest  means  to  do  so. 
But  who,  what  human  being,  stands  in  the  relation  of  master  or  any  other 
relation,  which  makes  him  interested  in  the  preservation  and  protection  of 
the  poor  Indian  thus  degraded  and  miserable  \  Thrust  out  from  human 
society,  without  the  sympathies  of  an}',  and  placed  without  the  pale  of 
common  justice,  who  is  there  to  protect  him,  or  to  defend  his  rights  \ 

Such,  Mr.  President,  is  the  present  condition  of  these  Cherokee  memo- 
rialists, whose  case  it  is  my  duty  to  submit  to  the  consideration  of  the 
Senate.  There  remains  but  one  more  inquiry  before  I  conclude.  Is  there 
any  remedy  within  the  scope  of  the  powers  of  the  federal  government,  as 
given  by  the  Constitution?  If  we  are  without  power,  if  we  have  no  con- 
stitutional authority,  then  we  are  also  without  responsibility.     Our  regrets 


650  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

may  be  excited,  our  sympathies  may  be  moved,  our  humanity  may  be 
shocked,  our  hearts  may  be  grieved,  but  if  our  hands  are  tied,  we  can 
only  unite  with  all  the  good,  the  Christian,  the  benevolent  portion  of  the 
human  family,  in  deploring  what  we  can  not  prevent. 

But,  sir,  we  are  not  thus  powerless.  I  stated  to  the  Senate,  when  I  be- 
gan, that  there  are  two  classes  of  the  Cherokees :  one  of  these  classes  de- 
sires to  emigrate,  and  it  was  their  petition  I  presented  this  morning  ;  and 
with  respect  to  these,  our  powers  are  ample  to  afford  them  the  most  liberal 
and  effectual  relief.  They  wish  to  go  beyond  the  Mississippi,  and  to  be 
guarantied  in  the  possession  of  the  country  which  may  be  there  assigned 
to  them.  As  the  Congress  of  the  United  States  have  full  powers  over  the 
Territories,  we  may  give  to  them  all  the  guaranty  which  Congress  can  ex- 
press, for  the  undisturbed  possession  of  their  lands.  With  respect  to  their 
case,  there  can  be  no  question  as  to  our  powers. 

And  then,  as  to  those  who  desire  to  remain  on  this  side  of  the  river,  I 
ask,  again,  are  we  powerless  ?  Can  we  afford  them  no  redress  ?  Must  we 
sit  still  and  see  the  injury  they  suffer,  and  extend  no  hand  to  relieve  ihem? 
It  were  strange,  indeed,  were  such  the  case.  Why  have  we  guarantied  to 
them  the  enjoyment  of  their  own  laws  ?  Why  have  we  pledged  to  them 
protection  ?  Why  have  we  assigned  them  limits  of  territory  ?  Why  have 
we  declared  that  they  shall  enjoy  their  homes  in  peace,  without  molestation 
from  any  ?  If  the  United  States  government  has  contracted  these  serious 
obligations,  it  ought,  before  the  Indians  were  reduced  by  our  assurances  to 
rely  upon  our  engagement,  to  have  explained  to  them  its  want  of  authority 
to  make  the  contract.  Before  we  pretend  to  Great  Britain,  to  Europe,  to 
the  civilized  world,  that  such  were  the  rights  we  would  secure  to  the  In- 
dians, we  ought  to  have  examined  the  extent  and  the  grounds  of  our  own 
rights  to  do  so.  But  is  such,  indeed,  our  situation  ?  No,  sir.  Georgia 
has  shut  her  courts  against  these  Indians.  What  is  the  remedy  ?  To  open 
ours.  Have  we  not  the  right  ?  What  says  the  Constitution  ?  "  The  ju- 
dicial power  shall  extend  to  all  cases  in  law  and  equity,  arising  under  this 
Constitution,  the  laws  of  the  United  States,  and  treaties  made,  or  which 
shall  be  made,  under  their  authority." 

But  here  was  a  case  of  conflict  between  the  rights  of  the  proprietors  and 
the  local  laws ;  and  here  was  the  very  case  which  the  Constitution  con- 
templated, when  it  declared  that  the  power  of  the  federal  judiciary  should 
extend  to  all  cases  under  the  authority  of  the  United  States.  Therefore, 
it  was  fully  within  the  competence  of  Congress,  under  the  provisions  of 
the  Constitution,  to  provide  the  manner  iu  which  the  Cherokees  might 
have  their  rights  decided,  because  a  grant  of  the  means  was  included  in 
the  grant  of  jurisdiction.  It  was  competent,  then,  for  Congress  to  decide 
whether  the  Cherokees  had  a  right  to  come  into  a  court  of  justice  and  to 
make  an  appeal  to  the  highest  authority,  to  sustain  the  solemn  treaties 
under  which  their  rights  had  been  guarantied,  and  in  the  sacred  character 
of  which  they  had  reposed  their  confidence.     And  if  Congress  possessed 


ON    OUR    RELATIONS    WITH    THE    CHEROKEES.  651 

the  power  to  extend  relief  to  the  Indians,  were  they  not  bound,  l>y  the 
most  sacred  of  human  considerations,  the  obligations  of  treaties,  the  pro- 
tection assured  them,  by  every  Christian  tie,  every  benevolent  feeling,  every 
humane  impulse  of  the  human  heart,  to  extend  it?  If  they  were  to  fail 
to  do  this,  and  there  was,  as  reason  and  revelation  declared  there  was,  a 
tribunal  of  eternal  justice,  to  which  all  human  power  was  amenable,  how 
could  they,  if  they  refused  to  perform  their  dulies  to  this  injured  and  op- 
pressed, though  civilized  race,  expect  to  escape  the  visitations  of  that  divine 
vengeance  which  none  would  be  permitted  to  avoid,  who  had  committed 
wrong,  or  done  injustice  to  others? 

At  this  moment,  when  the  United  States  were  urging  on  the  govern- 
ment of  France  the  fulfillment  of  the  obligations  of  the  treaty  concluded 
with  that  country,  to  the  execution  of  which  it  was  contended  that  France 
had  plighted  her  sacred  faith,  what  strength,  what  an  irresistible  force 
would  be  given  to  our  plea,  if  we  could  say  to  France  that  in  all  instances, 
we  had  completely  fulfilled  all  our  engagements,  and  that  we  had  adhered 
faithfully  to  every  obligation  which  we  had  contracted,  no  matter  whether 
it  was  entered  into  with  a  powerful  or  a  weak  people  ;  if  we  could  say  to 
her,  that  we  had  complied  with  all  our  engagements  to  others,  that  we  now 
came  before  her,  always  acting  right  as  we  had  done,  to  induce  her  also 
to  fulfill  her  obligations  to  us.  How  should  we  stand  in  the  eyes  of  France 
and  of  the  civilized  world,  if  we,  in  spite  of  the  most  solemn  treaties,  which 
had  existed  for  half  a  century,  and  had  been  recognized  in  every  form, 
and  by  every  branch  of  the  government ;  how  would  they  be  justified,  if 
they  suffered  these  treaties  to  be  trampled  under  foot,  and  the  rights  which 
they  were  to  secure,  trodden  into  the  dust?  How  would  great  Britain, 
after  the  solemn  understanding,  entered  into  with  her  at  Ghent,  feel,  after 
such  a  breach  of  faith  ?  And  how  could  he,  as  a  commissioner  on  the 
negotiation  of  that  treaty,  hold  up  his  head  before  Great  Britain,  after 
having  been  thus  made  an  instrument  of  fraud  and  deception,  as  he  assur- 
edly would  have  been,  if  the  rights  of  the  Indians  are  to  be  thus  violated, 
and  the  treaties  by  which  they  were  secured,  violated  ?  How  could  he 
hold  up  his  head,  after  such  a  violation  of  rights,  and  say  that  he  was 
proud  of  his  country,  of  which  they  all  must  wish  to  be  proud  ? 

For  himself,  he  rejoiced  that  he  had  been  spared,  and  allowed  a  suitable 
opportunity  to  present  his  views  and  opinions,  on  this  great  national  sub- 
ject, so  interesting  to  the  national  character  of  the  country  for  justice  and 
equity.  He  rejoiced  that  the  voice  which,  without  charge  of  presumption 
or  arrogance,  he  might  say,  was  ever  raised  in  defense  of  the  oppressed  of 
the  human  species,  had  been  heard  in  defense  of  this  most  oppressed  of  all. 
To  him,  in  that  awful  hour  of  death,  to  which  all  must  come,  and  which, 
with  respect  to  himself,  eould  not  be  very  far  distant,  it  would  be  a  source 
of  the  highest  consolation,  that  an  opportunity  had  been  found  by  him, 
on  the  floor  of  the  Senate,  in  the  discharge  of  his  official  duty,  to  pro- 
nounce his  views  on  a  course  of  policy  marked  by  such  wrongs  as  were 


652  SrEECHES  OF  henry  clay. 

calculated  to  arrest  the  attention  of  every  one,  and  that  he  had  raised  his 
humble  voice,  and  pronounced  his  solemn  protest,  against  such  wrongs. 

lie  would  no  longer  detain  tlie  Senate,  but  would  submit  the  following 
propositions. 

Resolved,  that  the  commitee  on  the  judiciary  be  directed  to  inquire  into  the 
expediency  of  making  further  provision,  by  law,  to  enable  Indian  nations  or 
tribes,  to  whose  use  and  occupancy  lands  are  secured  by  treaties  concluded  be- 
tween them  and  the  United  States,  to  defend  and  maintain  their  rights  to'  such 
lands,  in  the  courts  of  the  United  States,  in  conformity  with  the  Constitution  of 
the  United  States. 

Resolved,  that  the  committee  on  Indian  affairs  be  directed  to  inquire  into  the 
expediency  of  making  further  provisions,  by  law,  for  setting  apart  a  district  of 
country  west  of  the  Mississippi  river,  for  such  of  the  Cherokee  nation  as  may  be 
disposed  to  emigrate  and  to  occupy  the  same,  and  for  securing,  in  perpetuity, 
the  peaceful  and  undisturbed  enjoyment  thereof,  to  the  emigrants  and  their  de- 
scendants. 

Mr.  Clay  moved  that  the  memorial  and  resolutions  adopted  by  the 
council  of  the  Running  Waters,  be  referred  to  the  committee  on  Indian 
affairs,  and  printed. 

As  to  his  resolutions,  he  knew,  that  in  the  regular  order  of  business,  they 
could  not  be  taken  up  until  to-morrow,  but,  if  it  met  with  the  approbation 
of  the  Senate,  he  would  be  as  well  disposed  to  act  on  them  to-day  as  to- 
morrow. 

In  reply  to  Mr.  Cuthbert,  of  Georgia,  and  Mr.  White,  of  Tennessee,  Mr. 
Clay  said  he  could  assure  the  honorable  senator  from  Georgia,  that  nothing 
was  further  from  his  purpose,  than  to  make  any  display  on  this  occasion. 
That  he  always  left  to  others,  and  by  the  judgment  of  the  Senate  he  was 
willing  to  abide,  whether  the  honorable  senator  himself  had  not  been  guilty 
of  that  which  he  imputed  to  others.  For,  after  addressing  the  Senate, 
himself,  some  time,  he  had  said  that  he  did  not  intend  arguing  the  question, 
that  Georgia  would  not  appear  before  the  Senate  or  any  other  tribunal. 
Now,  Georgia  might  be  content  to  do  that,  but  could  Congress,  could  hon- 
orable senators,  reconcile  it  with  their  duty,  with  their  responsibility  to 
coldly  contemplate  the  violation  of  numerous  treaties,  to  witness  ihe 
destruction  of  a  people  under  the  protection  of  the  United  States,  and 
to  let  that  injustice  which  had  been  inflicted  on  these  unfortunate  Chero- 
kees,  be  perpetuated  without  the  slightest  notice  on  their  part? 

The  gentleman  from  Tennessee  (Mr.  White)  had  remarked,  that  they 
were  all  unconstitutional  treaties ;  that  they  had  no  binding  force  as 
treaties;  that  General  Washington  was  mistaken;  that  every  succeeding 
administration  was  mistaken;  that  General  Jackson  himself  was  mis" 
taken,  in  1817,  in  regard  to  these  treaties.  Now,  if  they  gave  the 
argument  of  the  honorable  senator  from  Tennessee  its  full  force,  what 
was  the  consequence?  What  did  he  (Mr.  Clay)  offer?  He  said,  merely 
to    open    the    question    to  the  court.      If  they    had   no    validity,   if  the 


ON    OUR    RELATIONS    WITH    THE    CHEROKEES.  653 

question  which  was  sent  to  the  judiciary  did  not  rest  upon  treaties,  they 
could  vindicate  no  rights  under  them.  Why  had  Georgia,  if  she  believed 
there  were  no  treaties,  made  provisions  in  her  late  act  to  which  he  had  re- 
ferred ?  Why  shut  out  the  rights  of  the  Indians  under  the  treaty  ?  Why, 
if  she  was  couviuced  of  the  unconstitutionality  of  the  treaties,  did  she  not 
allow  them  to  be  submitted  to  the  federal  judiciary,  which  was  bound  to 
declare  that  they  were  not  obligatory  and  binding,  if  unconstitutionaU 
Why  has  she  studiously  precluded  the  possibility  of  a  review,  in  the  Su- 
preme Court,  of  the  decisions  of  the  local  tribunals?  But  the  gentleman 
had  told  the  Senate,  that  the  treaty  of '91  was  the  first  that  guarantied  to 
the  Cherokees  their  lands,  and  that  President  Washington  doubted  whether 
it  was  necessary  to  submit  it  to  the  Senate.  It  might  be  true,  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  government,  when  every  thing  was  new  and  unfixed, 
that  there  were  doubts ;  but  General  Washington  decided  that  it  was  a 
treaty,  and  laid  it,  with  his  doubts,  before  the  Senate,  who  decided  them, ' 
and  the  treaty  was  ratified  by  and  with  the  consent  of  the  Senate.  And 
from  that  day  those  doubts  have  remained  dispelled.  He  was  indebted 
to  the  honorable  senator  for  the  historical  fact  which  he  (Mr.  Clay) 
had  not  before  pressed,  that  this  very  guaranty  which  secured  to  the 
Indians  the  undisturbed  possession  of  their  lands  in  the  treaty  of  '91,  was 
inserted  by  the  express  direction  of  the  father  of  his  country.  And  the 
Senate  was  called  upon  now,  not  merely  to  violate  the  solemn  obliga- 
tions which  the  whole  nation  had  contracted,  but  to  violate  the  provision 
which  had  been  inserted  at  the  instance  of  the  venerated  father  of  his 
country ! 

The  honorable  senator  had  told  this  body,  that  the  treaty  of  '91  was  the 
first  in  which  there  was  any  guaranty.  If  the  gentleman  meant  to  say  it 
was  the  first  in  which  there  was  any  express  guaranty,  he  (Mi'.  Clay) 
would  admit  it.  But,  in  the  treaty  of  '85,  if  it  was  not  expressed,  was  it 
not  implied  ?  What  was  that  clause,  marking  the  boundaries  of  their  ter- 
ritory ?  That,  in  the  same  treaty,  which  places  the  Indians  under  the  pro- 
tection of  the  United  States,  and  excludes  them  from  the  authority  of  any 
other  sovereign  ?  And  that  which  outlaws  citizens  of  the  United  States 
who  intrude  in  their  territory  ?  What  was  the  meaning  of  those  clauses,  if 
they  did  not,  by  implication  at  least,  guaranty  their  rights,  their  property, 
and  the  peace  of  their  country  ?  But,  the  gentleman  says,  that  in  insert- 
ing the  guaranty  of  '91,  there  was  a  mistake  ;  it  was  supposed  that  it  was 
without  the  limits  of  North  Carolina,  and  other  States;  a  mistake  which 
ran  through  all  the  treaties  from  that  time  down  to  1817,  which  renewed 
and  enforced  the  pre-existing  treaties.  So  that  General  Jackson  himself 
had  been  acting  under  a  mistake  when  he  signed  the  treaty  of  1817.  Is 
it  possible,  that,  if  a  mistake  were  committed  as  early  as  1791,  it  would 
not  have  been  corrected  in  some  of  the  various  treaties  negotiated  as  late  as 
1817? 

The  senator  had  said  also,  that  the  States  had  a  right  to  extend  their 


654  SPEECHES    OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

laws  over  all  the  territories  and  people  within  their  limits,  as  defined  by 
the  treaty  of  '83.  Why,  that  was  the  very  ques!ion  under  consideration, 
the  identical  question  to  be  submitted  to  the  judiciary.  He  (Mr.  Clay) 
contended  that  the  States  had  no  right  to  extend  their  laws  over  that  por- 
tion of  the  territory  assigned  to  the  Indians,  or  over  the  Indians  dwelling 
upon  it.  And  that  is  the  exact  question  which  his  resolution  proposes  to 
be  submitted  to  the  determination  of  the  judiciary,  and  which  the  late  act 
of  Georgia  carefully  shuns. 

But  the  senator  from  Tennessee  had  asked,  "  What  will  the  poor  Indian, 
■with  his  six  hundred  and  forty  acres  of  land,  do,  contending  for  his  rights 
in  a  court  of  justice  ?"  Why,  he  (Mr.  Clay)  would  admit  that  his  condi- 
tion would  be  miserable  enough ;  but  it  was  all  they  could  do  for  him,  and 
they  were  bound  to  do  all  they  could,  under  the  constitutional  power  they 
possessed,  to  maintain  his  rights.  But,  he  would  ask,  what  was  to  prevent 
these  Indians,  in  their  corporate,  or  collective  character,  from  bringing  their 
grievances  before  the  courts  ?  Nothing.  And,  that  they  were  competent 
to  this,  wTe  had  only  to  look  at  the  state  papers  which  had  emanated  from 
them,  and  which  did  them  immortal  credit,  to  be  convinced.  The  senator 
from  Tennessee  asked,  ';  What  the  States  would  do  ?  Would  they  array 
the  federal  power  against  the  power  of  the  State  governments,  and  thus 
produce  that  condition  of  things  which  must  result  in  the  Indians'  being 
stricken  from  the  face  of  the  earth  V  Did  not  the  honorable  senator  re- 
member the  period  when  a  State  of  this  Union  wras  actually  arrayed  and 
marshaled  to  defend  its  interpretation  of  the  Constitution  \  He  was  hearty 
in  the  support  of  the  force  bill ;  he  did  not  stop  to  look  at  the  possible  con- 
sequences of  a  civil  war.  He  (Mr.  Clay)  gave  it  his  reluctant  and  most 
painful  support.  He  would  gladly  have  turned  the  bitter  cup  from  his 
lips,  but  he  felt  it  to  be  his  duty  to  sustain  the  authority  of  the  general 
government ;  and,  after  giving  to  the  subject  the  most  solemn  and  serious 
consideration,  he  felt  himself  constrained  to  sustain  that  measure.  And  he 
went  along  with  the  senator  from  Tennessee  upon  the  principle,  now  de- 
nied by  him,  that  the  federal  authority  must  maintain  its  dignity.  He 
went  upon  the  ground,  now  abandoned  by  the  senator  from  Tennessee,  that 
no  State  ought  to  array  itself  against  the  constitutional  powers  of  this  gov- 
ernment. 

How  was  the  fact  up  to  the  period  of  1829  ?  The  gentleman  from 
Tennessee  tells  us  the  true  policy  of  this  government  is  to  send  those  poor 
creatures  beyond  the  Mississippi,  and  that  there  is  no  impediment  in  the 
obligations  of  subsisting  treaties.  Never,  until  the  new  light  burst  upon 
us,  that  hundreds  of  Indian  treaties,  made  during  a  period  of  half  a  cen- 
tury, under  almost  every  administration  of  the  government,  concluded  and 
ratified  with  all  the  solemn  forms  of  a  Constitution,  and  containing  the 
most  explicit  guaranties  and  obligations  of  protection  to  the  Indians,  and 
of  security  to  their  possessions,  were  mere  nullities,  was  it  supposed  com- 
petent to  effect  a  compulsory  removal  of  the  Indians  beyond  the  Missis- 


ON  OUR  RELATIONS  WITH  THE  CHEROKEES.       655 

sippi.  It  is  true,  that  the  policy  of  removing  them  has  long  been  enter- 
tained ;  was  contemplated  by  Mr.  Jefferson ;  but  it  was  a  free,  voluntary, 
and  unconstrained  emigration.  No  one,  until  of  late,  ever  dreamed  of  a 
forcible  removal,  against  their  consent,  accomplished  either  by  direcl  appli- 
cation of  military  power,  or  by  cruel  and  intolerable  local  legislation.  He 
wished  that  they  would  voluntarily  remove.  He  believed  that  absorption 
or  extinction  was  the  only  alternative  of  their  remaining  in  the  bosom  of 
the  whites.  But  they  were  a  part  of  the  human  race,  as  capable  as  we  are 
of  pleasure  and  pain,  and  invested  with  as  indisputable  a  right  as  we  have, 
to  judge  of  and  pursue  their  own  happiness. 

It  is  said,  that  annihilation  is  the  destiny  of  the  Indian  race.  Perhaps 
it  is,  judging  from  the  past.  But  shall  we  therefore  hasten  it.?  Death  is 
the  irreversible  decree  pronounced  against  the  human  race.  Shall  we  ac- 
celerate its  approach,  because  it  is  inevitable  ?  No,  sir.  Let  us  treat  with 
the  utmost  kindness,  and  the  most  perfect  justice,  the  aborigines  whom 
Providence  has  committed  to  our  guardianship.  Let  us  confer  upon  them, 
if  we  can,  the  inestimable  blessings  of  Christianity  and  civilization,  and 
then,  if  they  must  sink  beneath  the  progressive  wave  of  civilized  popula- 
tion, we  are  free  from  all  reproach,  and  stand  acquitted  in  the  sight  of  God 
and  man. 

The.  senator  from  Tennessee  has  left  the  Senate  under  the  impression,  no 
doubt  unintentionally,  that  three  other  States  had  advanced  as  far  as 
Georgia  in  the  exercise  of  a  jurisdiction  over  the  Indians  aud  their  prop- 
erty. But  if  he  (Mr.  Clay)  were  rightly  informed,  this  was  far  from  cor- 
rect. North  Carolina  had  exercised  no  such  jurisdiction.  She  had  not 
touched  a  hair  upon  the  head  of  any  Indian.  Tennessee  had  extended 
her  laws  to  the  Indian  country,  for  the  sole  purpose  of  protecting  the 
Indians,  and  punishing  the  white  intruders.  Her  upright  judges  and  tri- 
bunals concurred,  unanimously,  if  he  were  rightly  informed,  in  supporting 
the  Iudian  rights.  No  State,  he  believed,  but  Georgia,  had  seized  upon 
the  Indian  lands,  and  distributed  them  among  the  whites.  From  the 
commencement  of  our  independence  down  to  this  time,  there  was  not 
another  instance  of  such  seizure,  and  appropriation,  by  any  otlier  member 
of  the  confederacy. 

Mr.  Clay  assured  the  senator  from  Georgia,  that  he  had  not  sought  for 
the  position  in  which  he  was  placed.  It  was  sought  of  him.  He  was  ap- 
plied to  by  the  unfortunate  Cherokees,  to  present  their  case  to  the  Senate. 
And  he  should  have  been  false  and  faithless  to  his  heart,  and  unworthy  of 
human  nature,  if  he  had  declined  to  be  their  organ,  however  inadequate  he 
feared  he  had  proved  himself  to  be. 

On  the  whole,  then,  said  Mr.  Clay,  the  resolutions  proposed  an  inquiry 
into  the  suitableness  of  making  further  provision  for  the  Cherokees  who 
choose  to  emigrate  beyond  the  Mississippi.  And  in  regard  to  those  of 
them  who  will  not  go,  but  who  prefer  to  cling  to  the  graves  of  their  fore- 
fathers, and  to  the  spot  which  gave  them  birth,  in  spite  of  any  destiny  iin- 


656  SPEECHES   OF    HENRY    CLAY. 

pending  over  them,  the  resolution  proposes,  that,  since  Georgia  has  shut 
her  courts  against  them,  we  should  inquire  whether  we  should  not  open 
those  of  the  federal  government  to  them,  and  ascertain  whether,  according 
to  the  Constitution,  treaties,  and  laws,  we  are  capable  of  fulfilling  the  obli- 
gations which  we  have  solemnly  contracted. 



